---
has_children: false
layout: default
nav_order: 0
title: 'Arguments for and against using only the results of scientific research '
---
# Arguments for and against using only the results of scientific research 


::: documentByline
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
:::

::: {#parent-fieldname-text-989244dba8af493da6940b736ba466b9}
By and large, classroom teaching is not based on the results of research
-- of any type. This has not gone unnoticed by critics. "It is quite
commonplace in education to see methods, programs, and techniques
employed for which the data on effectiveness is minimal, non-existent,
or even contrary. . . . Imagine the outcry if new miracle wonder drugs
were released to an unsuspecting public without extensive, experimental
clinical trials testifying to their efficacy. But in education this is
precisely what typically happens." (Wheldall, 2005, pp. 578-579). This
means that there are few constraints on the kinds of classroom practice
which are included in teacher education programmes. "In contrast to
other professions, education has no publicly agreed upon process for
identifying practices that should be included in or excluded from
pre-service and in-service teacher training programmes" (Greenwood,
2001, p. 37). It also leaves teachers, schools, and school systems open
to capture by the purveyors of each new theory which comes along. "When
one has an education system that is based on a loose combination of
theory and fact, where there are no proper standards for trials before
changes are made in the system, then the system is wide open to
intrusion from trendy theories of all kinds in all areas" (Marsh, 2005,
p. 702).

This is not to say that teacher educators do not engage in research.
They engage in large amounts of research -- but it is research of a
particular type. An examination of research reports both here in New
Zealand and overseas suggests that the majority of teacher educators are
electing to invest their research time in descriptive and interpretive
inquiry rather than in experimental or scientific research. In a survey
of the research reports published in 1995, Church (1998) found that
approximately half of all of the research into teaching published that
year involved a narrative, descriptive, or ethnographic method, and a
high proportion of these were based on an interpretive methodology. An
examination of the papers presented to the annual conference of the New
Zealand Association for Research in Education indicates that, in 1987,
28% of the papers presented used a descriptive research method, and 23%
employed a correlational or experimental method (Church 1988). By 2005,
70% of papers presented at this conference used a descriptive method and
only 12% used a correlational or experimental method. This change
corresponds closely to the increase in the number of teacher educators
joining NZARE over this period.

At the same time that teacher educators have been moving away from
empirical analyses of teaching-learning relationships into narrative
inquiry, ethnographic inquiry and practitioner research, other groups of
educational researchers have been arguing that only well controlled
empirical research can identify effective teaching practices and lead to
improvements in classroom practice. "Reform in American education
depends on a movement toward evidence-based practice, using the findings
of rigorous research to guide educational practices and policies"
(Slavin, 2005). "To improve the results achieved by schools, the
instructional practices that are shared widely across the profession
should be limited to those that are most likely to produce better
results. Scientific research is the best method for predicting the
results that different practices are likely to produce" (Grossen, 2001).
"Before any instructional interventions are formally endorsed for public
consumption, they should be carefully scrutinized with respect to their
evidence credibility . . . on the basis of some type of educational
research vetting process" (Levin, 2005, p. 5). "Just as it would be
unimaginable to administer untested drugs to patients or, worse, to fail
to administer life-saving treatments in favour of unproven ones, so it
should become unimaginable to forego proven methods in education"
(Reyna, 2005, p. 39).

The idea that teaching should be based on scientific research is not a
new idea. "The efficiency of any profession depends in large measure
upon the degree to which it becomes scientific. The profession of
teaching will improve . . . as the leaders in education direct their
choices of methods by the results of scientific investigation rather
than general opinion" (E. L. Thorndike, 1906, p. 206 cited in Mayer,
2005).

Recently, two clearinghouses have been established to produce and
disseminate reviews of research in educational policy and practice.
These are the What Works Clearinghouse in the US and the Evidence for
Policy and Practice Information and Coordinating Centre (EPPI) in the
UK. It is clear from the operations manuals of these two centres that
reviews will be limited to evaluations which meet a list of well defined
quality control standards.

Perhaps the most contentious development has been the passing in 2001 of
the *Reauthorisation of the* *Elementary and Secondary Education Act* in
the US -- an act which has come to be known as the *No Child Left
Behind* *Act*. Not only does this legislation argue that teacher
education programmes and teaching practices must be based on "scientific
research", the legislation will channel federal funds to programmes
which are based on scientific research and not to programmes which do
not meet this requirement. "The bottom line . . . is that research in
education must now satisfy the canons of science just as scientific
research in other fields has done for some time. . . . The *No Child
Left Behind Act* mandates determining what educational programs and
practices have been clearly demonstrated to be effective through
rigorous scientific research. Federal funding will then be targeted to
support the programs and teaching methods that improve student learning
and achievement" (Reyna, 2005, p. 44).

For some educational researchers, the passing of the *No Child Left
Behind Act* represents an historic step forward for educational
research, educational policy formulation and teaching practice.

At the dawn of the 21st century, education is finally being dragged,
kicking and screaming, into the 20th century. The scientific revolution
that utterly transformed medicine, agriculture, transportation,
technology and other fields early in the 20th century almost completely
bypassed the field of education. If Rip Van Winkle had been a physician,
a farmer, or an engineer, he would be unemployable if he awoke today. If
he had been a good elementary school teacher in the 19th century, he
would probably be a good elementary school teacher today. . . . The most
important reason for the extraordinary advance in medicine, agriculture
and other fields is the acceptance by practitioners of evidence as the
basis for practice" (Slavin, 2002, p. 16).

For many teaching researchers however, the *No Child Left Behind Act*
represents an historic step backwards. Criticism of the idea that
educational practice should be based on the results of scientific
research into learning and teaching has a long history and passage of
the *No Child Left Behind Act* resulted, predictably, in a re-airing of
many of these criticisms. Classroom practice, it is argued, cannot be
based on the results of scientific research because this approach:
"overlooks questions and issues central to teachers' work" (Roulston,
Legette, Deloach & Pitman, 2005, p. 169), because it "undervalues and
marginalizes the contributions of the arts and humanities to our
understanding of education aims and practices" (Erickson, 2005), and
because it eliminates "the possibility that the federal government will
support research and evaluation projects that propose multiple views of
knowledge and multiple research strategies to obtain that knowledge"
(Lincoln, 2004, p. 1).

What many of the critics of the *No Child Left Behind Act* have noticed
is that the authors of the Act, like the authors of the report
*Scientific research in education* (National Research Council, 2002)
which preceded it, appear to have assumed that "based on the results of
scientific research" is equivalent to "based on the results of
randomised groups evaluations of educational programmes". "The move
towards 'evidence-based policy and practice' oversimplifies complex
problems and is being used to warrant . . . governmental incursion into
legislating scientific method in the realm of educational research"
(Lather, 2004). This raises two questions. Is the social science
approach to research actually an example of science? And should
legislators have the power to prescribe research method by prescribing
the investigative methods which will and will not be funded? "For many,
the key question is whether legislators or scientists should ultimately
decide issues of research method" (Feuer, Towne & Shavelson, 2002, p.
5).

So, is teaching practice to be based on any kind of information
collected by any kind of research method, or is the research base to be
limited to that research which meets conventional standards of
measurement reliability, internal validity, and generalisability?

As many educational researchers have noted, the developments of the past
century in medical and surgical diagnosis, practice, and technology were
all preceded by scientific research. In other words, a transition from
natural philosophy to natural science marked not only the emergence of
the physical sciences but also the rapid 20th century explosion of
knowledge about biological processes, human development, disease
transmission, public health, anaesthesia, medical practice, and so on.

Secondly, if teaching practice is to become more "research-based" then
surely the research which is being used as a guide to practice will need
to be something more than an endless recycling of descriptions of
existing practices and the stories which are used to justify those
practices. Nuthall argues persuasively that "reflective practice" (as
the term is currently used) cannot identify effective and ineffective
teaching practices because teachers can only reflect upon what they
already know. He further argues (Nuthall, 2005, p. 924) that
"ethnographic studies that are based on teachers' perceptions and
self-reports of their own teaching serve to elaborate and justify the
routines and the myths that support them." Practitioner research cannot
identify either effective or ineffective practices and it most certainly
cannot generate new knowledge.

In the final analysis we need a procedure which will perform the
functions so concisely described by Margaret Eisenhart (2005, p. 57).
"We need principles that rule things in and out of research and we need
principles of quality that distinguish weak from strong research,
depending on the research question and the research design. Unless we
are able to tell policy makers and the public what constitutes good
research on a given topic, we will continue to have trouble convincing
them of the value of \[even\] our best work."

If there is one thing which sets a scientific approach apart from all
other approaches to the study of learning and teaching it is that
"science is self-correcting, so that unproductive theories eventually
can be discarded on the basis of mounting evidence and reasoned
argument" (Mayer, 2001, p. 30). Of all the methods currently available,
a scientific approach is the only one which allows us to reliably "rule
things in and rule things out." Narrative and descriptive accounts
cannot perform this function. "The facts care little about how
beautiful, compelling, or coherent our stories are" (Reyna, 2005, p.
45).

A scientific approach cannot answer all questions relating to learning
and teaching. It remains however, the only approach so far developed
which has the potential to identify cause and effect relationships
between teaching practices and learning outcomes and, hence, to enable
the development of a theory of learning and teaching which teachers can
use to discriminate between teaching practices which are, and are not
likely to facilitate the development of different kinds of skills and
understandings in different kinds of learners. The use of a scientific
approach to questions about what works, for whom, and under what
conditions does not rule out other questions and it does not rule out
the use of other methods of inquiry into the diverse matters which are
included under the heading "education".

We are, of course, only at the beginning of the journey towards
discovering what works for whom, why, and under what circumstances. In
order for this journey to occur, the history of science suggests that a
number of changes will need to occur more or less in parallel.

One of these is the development of distinctions and, eventually, a
taxonomy of events which allow for the identification of cause and
effect relationships within the subject matter of learning and teaching
(Rosenberg, 1995). In all of the sciences this has involved a gradual
recognition that the scientific taxonomy cannot be given in the concepts
of everyday language because the concepts of everyday language divide
teaching into classes of teaching events on the basis of appearance and
not on the basis of function or effect.

A second change is the gradual move from endless theorising and
conjecture to systematic observation of the subject matter together with
a concomitant move from reliance on currently held beliefs to a greater
reliance on the results of controlled and systematic observation
(Carnine, 2000). This shift has to occur not only in the mindsets of
researchers but also in the mindsets of practitioners as was the case
when increasing numbers of medical practitioners began to adopt the
ideas of the new "clinical science" during the first half of the 20th
century (Le Fanu, 1999). "Early in the 20th century, the practice of
medicine was at a similar point. For example, research had long since
identified the importance of bacteria in disease, and by 1865 Joseph
Lister had demonstrated the effectiveness of antiseptic procedures in
surgery. . . . Yet it took 30 years to convince tradition-bound
physicians to use sterile procedures. If he dropped a scalpel, a
physician in 1910 was as likely as not to give it a quick wipe and carry
on. Today, of course, the linkage between research and practice in
medicine is so tight than no physician would dream of ignoring the
findings of rigorous research" (Slavin, 2002, p. 16).

A third change which has to occur is the development of measuring
instruments and a research methodology which permit detection of the
cause-and-effect relationships which exist within the subject matter
-- such as, for example, identification of the conditions which are
necessary in order for a particular type of learner to learn and
remember a particular kind of skill (Johnston & Pennypacker, 1993). This
leads us to our next question. Which of the three most common approaches
to research into learning and teaching can be considered to be
"scientific"?
:::

::: referencesList
#### References

-   Carnine, D. (2000). Why education experts resist effective
    practices. Retrieved December 17, 2001 from
    http://www.edexcellence.net/library/carnine.html
-   Church, R. J. (1998). The utility of qualitative, social science,
    and behaviour analysis research into learning and teaching. Paper
    presented to the annual conference of the N.Z. Association for
    Research in Education, Dunedin, New Zealand.
-   Eisenhart, M. (2005). Science plus: A response to the responses to
    Scientific Research in Education. Teachers College Record, 107,
    52-58.
-   Erickson, F. (2005). Arts, humanities, and sciences in educational
    research and social engineering in federal education policy.
    Teachers College Record, 107, 4-9.
-   Feuer, M. J., Towne, L., & Shavelson, R. J. (2002). Scientific
    culture and educational research. Educational Researcher, 31, 4-14.
-   Greenwood, C. R. (2001). Science and students with learning and
    behavioral problems. Behavioral Disorders, 27, 37-52
-   Grossen, B. (2001). What does it mean to be a research-based
    profession? Retrieved 29 June, 2001, from
    http://darkwing.uoregon.edu/\~bgrossen/resprf.htm.
-   Johnston, J. M., & Pennypacker, H. S. (1993). Strategies and tactics
    of behavioral research (2nd ed.). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
    Associates.
-   Lather, P. (2004). Scientific research in education: A critical
    perspective. British Educational Research Journal, 30, 759-772.
-   Le Fanu, J. (1999). The rise and fall of modern medicine. London:
    Abacus.
-   Levin, J. R. (2005). Randomized classroom trials on trial. In G. D.
    Phye, D. H. Robinson, & J. R. Levin (Eds.), Empirical methods for
    evaluating educational interventions (pp. 3-27). Burlington, MA:
    Elsevier Academic Press.
-   Lincoln, Y. S. (2004). Scientific research in education/evidence
    matters: Randomized trials in education research. Academe. Retrieved
    10 October, 2006, from http://findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_qa3860/
    is_200411/ai_n9470394.
-   Marsh, R. (2005). Evidence-based practice for education? Educational
    Psychology, 25, 701-704.
-   Mayer, R. E. (2001). Resisting the assault on science: The case for
    evidence-based reasoning in educational research. Educational
    Researcher, 30, 29-30.
-   Mayer, R. E. (2005). The failure of educational research to impact
    educational practice: Six obstacles to educational reform. In G. D.
    Phye, D. H. Robinson, & J. R. Levin (Eds.), Empirical methods for
    evaluating educational interventions (pp. 67-81). Burlington, MA:
    Elsevier Academic Press.
-   National Research Council. (2002). Scientific research in education.
    Washington, DC: National Academic Press.
-   Nuthall, G. A. (2005). The cultural myths and realities of classroom
    teaching and learning: A personal journey. Teachers College Record,
    107, 895-934.
-   Reyna, V. F. (2005). The No Child Left Behind Act, scientific
    research and federal educational policy: A view from Washington, DC.
    In G. D. Phye, D. H. Robinson, & J. R. Levin (Eds.), Empirical
    methods for evaluating educational interventions (pp. 29-52).
    Burlington, MA: Elsevier Academic Press.
-   Rosenberg, A. (1995). Philosophy of social science (2nd ed.).
    Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
-   Roulston, K., Legette, R., Deloach, M., & Pitman, C. B. (2005). What
    is 'research' for teacher-researchers? Educational Action Research,
    13, 169-190.
-   Slavin, R. E. (2002). Evidence-based education policies:
    Transforming educational practice and research. Educational
    Researcher, 31, 15-21.
-   Slavin, R. E. (2005) Evidence-based reform: Advancing the education
    of students at risk. Retrieved 10 October, 2006 from
    http://www.americanprogress.org/issues/kfiles/ b492641.html.
-   Wheldall, K. (2005). When will we ever learn? Educational
    Psychology, 25, 573-584.
:::
