# Necessary condition 3. Sufficient timed practice to achieve the fluency goal \n

::: documentByline
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
:::

::: {#parent-fieldname-text-1190f5115abf437ca287c6c5feeb97b9}
Fluency development is primarily a function of additional practice. This
practice needs to continue until the fluency goal is reached. A
considerable amount of research has been undertaken into the fluency
levels which predict long term retention. Most of this research has been
undertaken by teachers and researchers working within the domain of
Precision Teaching. Reviews of the results of the Precision Teaching
research will be found in Binder (1993, 1996), Binder, Haughton and
Bateman (2002), Binder and Watkins (1990), Kubina and Morrison (2000)
and Lindsley (1992).

Research based lists of the fluency levels which have been found to
predict long term retention have been provided by a number of authors
(e.g., Binder et al., 2002; Freeman & Haughton, 1993a, 1993b; Haring,
Liberty & White, 1981; Hasbrouck & Tindal, 1992; Haughton, 1980; Howell
& Lorson-Howell, 1990; Koorland, Keel & Ueberhorst, 1990; Mercer, Mercer
& Evans, 1982). Figure 4513 provides a summary of the research-based
fluency levels which are currently being used to define mastery with
respect to selected basic skills.

Where the skill which is to be mastered is one which is going to be used
every day, (as is the case with most everyday skills such as dressing,
cooking, driving and so on), these additional practice opportunities
will occur as the learner sets about his or her daily activities. An
example of the amount of additional practice which is necessary to bring
a skill such as getting dressed to fluency will be found in Young, West,
Howard & Whitney (1986).

Where the learning task involves the mastery of new equivalence
relations, the amount of practice which is required to build fluency may
be considerable. "The number of trials needed by nine first and second
graders with learning problems to reach 30 digits correct per minute
with two or fewer errors on subtraction facts 0 to 9 ranged from 632 to
1,168 with a mean of 840" (Mercer & Miller, 1992, p. 32). Silbert,
Carnine & Stein (1981, p. 248) report that primary school learners take,
on average, twenty, 8-minute sessions (160 minutes) to achieve fluency
on one set of nine facts (e.g. 1 + 4, 2 + 4, 3 + 4, 4 + 4, 5 + 4, 6 + 4,
7 + 4, 8 + 4, 9 + 4).

![Figure 4513. Fluency levels which have been found to predict
maintenance (long term retention) for selected academic
skills.](../../../../../../assets/images/Figure4513.png "Figure 4513. Fluency levels which have been found to predict maintenance (long term retention) for selected academic skills."){.image-inline}

*Figure 4513. Fluency levels which have been found to predict
maintenance (long term retention) for selected academic skills.*

In the great majority of cases, fluency building activities will need to
be generated by the teacher. An analysis of the practice exercises
provided in textbooks indicates that the great majority of textbooks do
not contain sufficient practice exercises to build fluency. Early
reading texts do not contain sufficient reading to build fluency in
reading (Church & Martin, 1992), early maths textbooks do not contain
sufficient exercises to build fluency in basic maths skills (Silbert,
Carnine & Stein, 1981), and spelling textbooks do not contain sufficient
exercises to build fluency in spelling (Brown, 1990).
:::

::: referencesList
#### References

-   Binder, C. (1993). Behavioral fluency: A new paradigm. Educational
    Technology, 33, 8-14.
-   Binder, C. (1996). Behavioral fluency: Evolution of a new paradigm.
    The Behavior Analyst, 19, 163-197.
-   Binder, C., Haughton, E., & Bateman, B. (2002). Fluency: Achieving
    true mastery in the learning process. Retrieved January 29, 2004,
    from http://www.haughtonlearningcenter.com
-   Binder, C., & Watkins, C. L. (1990). Precision teaching and direct
    instruction: Measurably superior instructional technology in
    schools. Performance Improvement Quarterly, 3(4), 74-96.
-   Brown, A. S. (1990). A review of recent research on spelling.
    Educational Psychology Review, 2, 365-397.
-   Church, R. J. & Martin, T. (1992). The Co-operative Reading Resource
    and how it changed the reading skill of 8- and 9-year olds. Set, No
    2, Item 6.
-   Freeman, G., & Haughton, E. (1993a). Building reading fluency across
    the curriculum. Journal of Precision Teaching, 10(2), 29-30.
-   Freeman, G., & Haughton, E. (1993b). Handwriting fluency. Journal of
    Precision Teaching, 10 (2), 31-32.
-   Haring, N. G., Liberty, K. A., & White, O. R. (1981). Handbook of
    experimental procedures. In: An investigation of phases of learning
    and facilitating instructional events for the severely/profoundly
    handicapped (Final project report). Appended. (U.S. Department of
    Education, Contract No. G00750093). Seattle: University of
    Washington, College of Education.
-   Hasbrouck, J. E. & Tindal, G. (1992). Curriculum-based oral reading
    fluency norms for students in Grades 2 through 5. Teaching
    Exceptional Children, 24, 41-44.
-   Haughton, E. (1980). Practicing practices: Learning by activity.
    Journal of Precision Teaching, 1(3), 3-20.
-   Howell, K. W., & Lorson-Howell, K. A. (1990). Fluency in the
    classroom. Teaching Exceptional Children, 22(3), 20-23.
-   Johnson, K. R., & Layng, T. V. J. (1992). Breaking the structuralist
    barrier: Literacy and numeracy with fluency. American Psychologist,
    47, 1475-14-90.
-   Koorland, M. A., & Keel, M. C., Ueberhorst, P. (1990). Setting aims
    for precision learning. Teaching Exceptional Children, 22(3), 64-66.
-   Kubina, R. M. Jr., & Morrison, R. S. (2000). Fluency in education.
    Behavior & Social Issues, 10, 83-99.
-   Lindsley, O. R. (1992). Precision teaching: Discoveries and effects.
    Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 25, 51-57.
-   Mercer, C. D., Mercer, A. R., & Evans, S. (1982). The use of
    frequency in establishing instructional aims. Journal of Precision
    Teaching, 3(3), 57-63.
-   Mercer, C. D. & Miller, S. P. (1992). Teaching students with
    learning problems in math to acquire, understand, and apply basic
    math facts. Remedial and Special Education, 13(3), 19-35, 61.
-   Silbert, J., Carnine, D., & Stein, M. (1981). Direct instruction
    mathematics. Columbus: Charles E. Merrill Publishing Co.
-   Young, K. R., West, R. P., Howard, V. F. & Whitney, R. (1986).
    Acquisition, fluency training, generalization, and maintenance of
    dressing skills of two developmentally disabled children. Education
    and Treatment of Children, 9, 16-29.
:::
