---
grand_parent: 'Important learning and teaching events '
great_great_grand_parent: 'Teacher Education''s Core Knowledge and Skills.'
has_children: true
layout: default
nav_order: 1
parent: 'Learning processes, learning outcomes and phases of learning '
title: 'What is learning? '
---
# What is learning?


```yaml
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
```


Gage and Berliner (1988) provide a fairly mainstream definition of
learning.

"It is a change in *behavior* which occurs in the process of learning.
Changes in physical characteristics (height, weight) do not count as
learning. Nor do changes in physical strength (lifting ability,
endurance), which occur as a result of physiological change in the size
of the muscles or the efficiency of circulatory and respiratory systems.
\... *Behavior* refers to some action, muscular or glandular, or
combination of actions. One kind of behavior is verbal - our spoken and
written actions. The changes from "dada" to "father", from an essay
about "How I Feel Today" to one about "Transcendental Meditation," from
writing "shcool" to "school" allow us to infer that learning has taken
place. The overt behaviors of talking, writing, moving, and the like
allow us to study the cognitive behaviors that interest us - thinking,
feeling, wanting, remembering, problem solving, creativity, and so on.
\... Typically, in school learning, the change in behavior we are
looking for is the ability to remember, understand, and apply various
things and the tendency to have certain attitudes and values, of the
kind set forth in our educational objectives. And we want these kinds of
learning to be *relatively permanent.* The final component of our
definition of learning is *experience* - interchange with the
environment whereby stimuli take on meaning and relationships are
established between stimuli and responses. We want to exclude behavior
changes due primarily to maturational processes, such as a baby\'s
learning to stand and walk. We also want to exclude behavior changes
that are due to alcohol or other drugs. And we want to exclude purely
physiological changes, like the behavior changes we show when we are
overtired" (Gage & Berliner, 1988, p 229).

Put briefly, *learning is a relatively permanent change in behaviour
which has occurred as a result of experience.*

Note that this definition of learning has four elements. First, there
must be a *change*. We must observe, with respect to a particular skill,
first, that the learner cannot perform that skill and then we must
observe (at some later time) that the learner can now perform that skill
before concluding that learning has occurred. Secondly, there must be a
change in the child\'s *behaviour*. Thirdly, we limit the use of the
term learning to changes in behaviour which are *relatively permanent*.
This excludes changes which are the result of changes in physiology:
fatigue, rest, illness, drugs and so on, and it excludes changes which
appear one day and then disappear the next. Fourthly, learning refers to
changes which have occurred as a *result of experience* - as a result of
the learner\'s interaction with his or her environment. We use the term
learning to distinguish between changes which are occurring as a result
of experience and those which are occurring as a result of growth,
maturation, or injury.

Let us elaborate this common definition of learning to identify some of
the implications and issues that arise when we try to study the
phenomena which we refer to as learning.
