---
has_children: false
layout: default
nav_order: 2
title: 'Progress made by qualitative researchers in developing an explanatory theory '
---
# Progress made by qualitative researchers in developing an explanatory theory 


::: documentByline
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
:::

::: {#parent-fieldname-text-d25eeea6e4944d4cb434726dfd810878}
Qualitative studies of educational sites such as classrooms have been
undertaken for more than 40 years. In 1995 approximately 17 per cent of
the research published in leading journals in learning and teaching were
reports of qualitative studies (Church, 1998). In the teacher education
journals published that year, over half of all published studies were
studies which had used a qualitative methodology.

This research effort has been singularly unproductive. The student of
learning and teaching will find that there are no textbooks summarising
the results of qualitative research into learning and teaching. As far
as can be ascertained, there are not even any review articles
summarising the results of qualitative research into particular aspects
of learning or particular aspects of teaching. The teacher who looks to
the results of qualitative research into learning and teaching will find
nothing in this corpus of research other than the craft knowledge of
other teachers describing what they do and why they do it. The teacher
who examines the qualitative research into learning and teaching will
discover no generalisations which can be used to guide decision making
with respect to motivating students, teaching different kinds of skills
and understandings, or the design of more effective teaching materials.

In part this lack of productivity is due to the fact that qualitative
inquiry was not specifically designed to study learning and teaching.
Because qualitative researchers have developed no agreed categories for
classifying learning outcomes (or the instructional events upon which
these learning outcomes might depend) the results of individual studies
can rarely be compared. Because qualitative researchers have developed
no experimental procedures, they are unable to test the relationships
between teaching events and learning outcomes which are suggested by
their studies.

In part, this lack of productivity is probably due to the fact that
while there is an increasing amount of qualitative research being
undertaken, it is being reported in a way which prevents any evaluation
of the accuracy of the data or the validity of the conclusions. "There
are few agreed-upon procedures for the reporting of humanistic research.
As a consequence, the quality of such research cannot be verified
because information on the methods employed is lacking" (Keeves &
Sowden, 1997).

This lack of productivity is probably also due, in part, to the relative
inefficiency of qualitative inquiry as a research method. A single study
may involve several months in the field. For each day spent in the
field, the ethnographer is usually advised to allow at least one day
writing up field notes, transcribing interviews, reflecting upon the
notes and interviews, and deciding what should be looked at next. For
each day spent in the field, the ethnographer is counselled to allow at
least twice that amount of time, following data collection, for data
coding, analysis, interpretation and report writing. "Effective analysis
requires at least double the time expended on collection of data"
(LeCompte & Preissle, 1993, p. 239). Not only is qualitative inquiry
enormously time consuming, qualitative researchers routinely collect
"more data than they can ever analyze. The data for a typical
dissertation study usually runs 700 to 1,500 pages of field notes or
interview transcripts" (Bogdan & Biklen, 1992, p. 68). "One researcher
complained that his team of investigators had generated over 25,000
pages of classroom protocols alone" (LeCompte & Preissle, 1993, p. 239).
The expenditure of such huge amounts of effort for so little return
raises serious questions about why this research method suddenly became
so popular amongst teaching researchers.
:::

::: referencesList
#### References

-   Bogdan, R. C., & Biklen, S. K. (1992). Qualitative research for
    education: An introduction to theory and methods. (2nd ed.). Boston:
    Allyn and Bacon.
-   Church, R. J. (1998). The utility of qualitative, social science,
    and behaviour analysis research into learning and teaching. Paper
    presented to the annual conference of the New Zealand Association
    for Research in Education, Dunedin, New Zealand.
-   Keeves, J. P., & Sowden, S. (1997). Descriptive data, Analysis of.
    In J. P. Keeves (Ed.), Educational research, methodology, and
    measurement: An international handbook (2nd ed., pp. 296-306).
    Oxford, England: Pergamon/Elsevier Science Inc.
-   LeCompte, M. D., & Preissle, J. (1993). Ethnography and qualitative
    design in educational research (2nd ed.). San Diego, CA: Academic
    Press.
:::
