---
grand_parent: 'How is learning to be observed and recorded? '
great_grand_parent: 'Types of research evidence '
great_great_grand_parent: 'Welcome to Teacher Education''s Core Knowledge and Skills.'
has_children: false
layout: default
nav_order: 1
parent: 'What, exactly, is observed by the three main approaches to research? '
title: 'Do behaviour analysts study events which can be observed in practice? '
---
# Do behaviour analysts study events which can be observed in practice?


```yaml
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
```


Behaviour analysts consider epistemological questions to be important
questions and have written at length about the philosophy of science
which underlies behaviour analysis research (e.g. Skinner, 1974; Baum,
1994; Chiesa, 1994). The assumptions which behaviour analysts bring to
their research differ in many important respects from the assumptions
made by both interpretivist researchers and cognitive scientists.

Behaviour analysts refer to their philosophy of science as *radical
behaviourism*. This label is, perhaps, unfortunate since radical
behaviourism has little in common with the Watsonian behaviourism about
which so much has been written or the methodological behaviourism of the
cognitive scientist. (The stimulus--\>cognitive structure--\>response
theories of the cognitive scientist are much closer to Watsonian
behaviourism than the historical explanations of the behaviour analyst
which, in turn, are much more like the selectionist explanations of the
evolutionary biologist than they are like the explanations of Watsonian
behaviourism). As one writer has observed, the fact that radical
behaviourism "comes under the behaviorist heading at all will eventually
be shown to be an accident of history" (Chiesa, 1994, p. 10).

The behaviour analyst makes no distinction between the subjective and
the objective worlds and takes no position on the idealist-realist
debate regarding the nature of truth. The radical behaviourist
philosophy of science is a pragmatic philosophy of science. Its origins
can be traced from the American philosophers Charles Pierce and William
James, the physicist Ernst Mach (who was a friend of James), B.F.
Skinner (who was greatly influenced by Mach) down to modern behaviour
analysts and modern philosophers of science such as Thomas Kuhn.

The behaviour analyst asks "What difference would it practically make to
anyone if this notion rather than that notion were true?" The behaviour
analyst argues that if a particular way of categorising transactions
with the environment works in the sense that it helps to identify
regularities in these transactions, or to identify factors which
regularly lead to a given kind of behaviour change, then this is a
sufficient justification for the use of these conceptual categories. The
behaviour analyst is agnostic about whether these conceptual categories
represent the "truth" about the world in which we live and learn.

The empiricism practised by Skinner and other radical behaviorists . . .
has always been characterized by pragmatism more than by any other
philosophical position (e.g. positivism, operationism). The ultimate
criterion for the validity of a concept or finding is not whether two
people can be brought into agreement but whether the scientist who uses
the concept can successfully predict and control the subject matter
(Heward & Cooper, 1992, p. 353).

Most behaviour analysts are acutely aware that the way in which the
researcher approaches the study of behaviour is profoundly influenced by
the learning history of the researcher, the language of the researcher,
and the conceptual structure of that language. In fact, radical
behaviourists have written at length about the way in which the concepts
and the grammar of everyday language hinder the discovery of scientific,
that is more useful, conceptions of the individual\'s transactions with
the environment and the effects of these transactions on future
behaviour. "The behavior of the scientist is not exempt from controlling
influences embedded within the larger culture. Scientists do not come to
the study of behavior free from the assumptions and presuppositions of
the surrounding culture but are in part guided by its conceptual
classifications, some of which are to be found in the words we
ordinarily use to describe behavior and in the grammatical patterns of
ordinary language" (Chiesa, 1994, p. 24).

Chiesa goes on to note that the concepts embedded in everyday language
terms encourage us to look at behaviour in culturally determined ways,
to ask certain questions rather than others, and to accept certain kinds
of explanations while rejecting others. She further notes that the
explanations of the behaviour analyst, couched as they are in terms of
past experiences rather than in terms of either immediate causes or the
actor\'s intentions, are at variance with common cultural practice and
therefore look strange to those who have had no training in behaviour
analysis. Some of the many ways in which everyday language constrains
and even hinders our attempts to develop a science of learning and
teaching have been described by Chiesa (1994), Hineline (1980, 1990,
1992) and Valsiner (1986).

In a similar vein, Johnston and Pennypacker (1993, p. 10-11) observe
that "In the case of human behavior as a subject matter, investigators
unavoidably approach it with many preconceptions that are learned from
living in this culture. Without realizing it, we are taught a great deal
about the nature of human behavior and how it supposedly works merely by
growing up in this (or any) culture. For example, our language suggests
that (a) behavior is generally motivated and controlled by events going
on in the mind, (b) emotions control subsequent actions, and (c) we can
make choices that are free of outside influence."

Because the concepts and grammatical structure of everyday language
influence the way in which we conceptualise changes in behaviour,
behaviour analysts tend to argue that a science of behaviour must
develop its own, carefully defined terms - that it cannot simply use
everyday terms. While the words which people use in describing what they
are doing and why they are doing it "can be used without embarrassment
by cognitive psychologists and behavior analysts alike in their daily
lives . . . these words cannot be used in their science" (Skinner, 1989,
p. 18).

Behaviour analysts exclude from their subject matter all events which
are in principle unobservable. For example, they exclude all mental
events or *mentalisms*, most hypothetical constructs, and all
*explanatory fictions.* "Fictional things and events are unobservable,
even in principle. No one has observed a mind, urge, impulse, or
personality; they are all inferred from behavior" (Baum, 1994, p. 32).
"Private events are observable, even if only by an audience of one . . .
Mental events, in contrast are unobservable because they are
nonphysical; no one can ever observe belief itself or intelligence
itself" (Baum & Heath, 1992, p. 1313).

The subject matter of behaviour analysis includes all events which are
in principle observable including events which are only observable by an
audience of one (the so-called private events). "Radical behaviorists
allow all natural events, including both the public and the private, and
rule out only the fictional" (Baum, 1994, p. 31-32). A behaviour analyst
would argue that if we are interested in memory, for example, then we
should talk about the act of remembering rather than "memory". This is
because the occurrence of remembering - the behaviour - is a naturally
occurring event which can be observed and recorded. However, we cannot
see or detect a memory (even with the aid of instrumentation) which
raises the question as to whether "memory" is anything more than a
metaphor.

As far as observation is concerned, behaviour analysts distinguish
between two general classes of events: public events, and private
events. The behaviour analyst argues that, with care, it is possible for
different observers to observe the same public event (e.g. a change in
behaviour) and to come to an agreement about what they have seen. This
position is taken on empirical, rather than logical or theoretical
grounds. It is an agreed requirement of behaviour analysis research that
the researcher collect some data regarding the reliability of the
observational procedures used. The most common data checking procedure
is a measure of the degree of agreement between two independently
operating observers or coders. The reliability checking data from many
thousands of separate experiments indicate that high levels of agreement
between observers can be achieved and, in fact, is achieved more often
than not. (See, for example, Kelly (1977)).

As far as private events are concerned, the behaviour analyst argues
that accuracy can never be demonstrated. This is because private events
(e.g. an individual\'s thoughts and feelings) can only ever be observed
and reported by the person who is experiencing them. Sometimes this
problem can be handled by making the private events public. For example,
a learner might be asked to "think out loud." In the case of private
events which cannot be made public, the behaviour analyst simply argues
that reports of these events should always be handled with caution since
no evidence of the veracity of the self-report of a private event is
possible. In this respect, behaviour analysts are no different from
qualitative researchers and cognitive scientists who have also found it
impossible to demonstrate the truthfulness of individuals\' self-reports
of their thought processes, attitudes, opinions and beliefs.


#### References

-   Baum, W. M. (1994). Understanding behaviorism: Science, behavior and
    culture. New York: HarperCollins College Publishers.
-   Baum, W. M., & Heath, J. L. (1992). Behavioral explanations and
    intentional explanations in psychology. American Psychologist, 47,
    1312-1317.
-   Chiesa, M. (1994). Radical behaviorism: The philosophy and the
    science. Boston: Authors Cooperative, Inc.
-   Heward, W. L., & Cooper, J. O. (1992). Radical behaviorism: A
    productive and needed philosophy for education. Journal of
    Behavioral Education, 2, 345-365.
-   Hineline, P.N. (1980). The language of behavior analysis: Its
    community, its functions, and its limitations. Behaviorism, 8,
    67-86.
-   Hineline, P.N. (1990). The origins of environment-based
    psychological theory. Journal of the Experimental Analysis of
    Behavior, 53, 305-320.
-   Hineline, P. N. (1992). A self-interpretive behavior analysis.
    American Psychologist, 47, 1274-1286.
-   Johnston, J. M., & Pennypacker, H. S. (1993). Strategies and tactics
    of behavioral research (2nd ed.). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
    Associates.
-   Kelley, M. B. (1977). A review of the observational data-collection
    and reliability procedures reported in the Journal of Applied
    Behavior Analysis. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 10, 97-101.
-   Skinner, B. F. (1974). About behaviorism. London: Jonathan Cape Ltd.
-   Skinner, B. F. (1989). The origins of cognitive thought. American
    Psychologist, 44, 13-18.
-   Valsiner, J. (1986). Between groups and individuals: Psychologists\'
    and laypersons\' interpretations of correlational findings. In J.
    Valsiner (Ed.), The individual subject and scientific methodology
    (pp 134-151). New York: Plenum Press.
