---
grand_parent: 'How is learning to be observed and recorded? '
great_grand_parent: 'Types of research evidence '
great_great_grand_parent: 'Teacher Education''s Core Knowledge and Skills.'
has_children: false
layout: default
nav_order: 3
parent: 'What, exactly, is observed by the three main approaches to research? '
title: 'Do ethnographers study events which can be observed in practice? '
---
# Do ethnographers study events which can be observed in practice?


```yaml
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
```


Qualitative researchers tend to disagree amongst themselves with respect
to the epistemological assumptions which underpin their research. Some
qualitative researchers adopt a realist or critical realist position.
"We believe something is \'out there\' (however many \'out theres\'
there are) and that the obdurate nature of what is out there does not
always cooperate with our dearly cherished constructions. Sometimes
reality comes and bashes us on the head. Anyone who has been fired from
a job or rejected by a lover, let alone confronted with data that do not
fit expectations, has faced an \'out there\' that resists internal
constructions" (LeCompte & Preissle, 1993, p. 317). "There is a world of
empirical reality out there. The way we perceive and understand that
world is largely up to us, but the world does not tolerate all
understandings of it equally (so that the individual who believes he or
she can halt a speeding train with his or her bare hands may be punished
by the world for acting on that understanding)" (Kirk & Miller, 1986, p.
11).

Some qualitative researchers adopt a pragmatic position. "The most
important test of any qualitative study is its usefulness" (Eisner,
1991, p. 58). This is closely similar to the radical behaviourist
position of the behaviour analyst.

And some (perhaps the majority) of qualitative researchers are
relativists who believe that each individual constructs their own
interpretation of what they have seen or heard. "I suggest an . . .
ontology that is relativist in nature. It begins with the premise that
all social realities are constructed and shared through well-understood
socialization processes. It is this socialized sharing that gives these
constructions their apparent reality" (Guba, 1990, p. 89). "Those who
see reality as a construction in the minds of individuals assert that it
is dubious whether there is a reality. If there is, we can never know
it. Furthermore, no amount of inquiry can produce convergence on it.
There is . . . always an infinite number of constructions that might be
made and hence there are multiple realities" (Lincoln & Guba, 1985, p.
83-84).

Individual qualitative researchers use few constructs in their research
reports, preferring to describe the events which they have observed as
directly as possible and, where feasible, to report their participant\'s
perspectives in the participant\'s own words. While the justifications
which participants provide for behaving in particular ways sometimes
refer to events which are in principle unobservable (e.g. "I simply did
what God would have wanted me to do"), these unobservable entities are
creations of the participants rather than being creations of the
researcher.

A considerable amount of qualitative research in education is based upon
the relativist presumption that an objective account is impossible
because different social groups construct different social realities.
The contradictions inherent in the relativist position have been
identified by a number of writers.

First, the observation that several observers can witness a particular
instance of learning, and come to several different conclusions about
what they have seen, does not mean that those observers have witnessed
several different things.

From the fact that we might not be able to reach agreement (an
epistemological matter), it does not follow that there is more than one
"reality" (an ontological matter). . . . We can inquire into the beliefs
of a society . . . and we can get these matters right or wrong - we can
get our descriptions of these beliefs right or wrong, or we can be right
or make mistakes about their origins or their effects. It simply does
not follow from the fact of the social construction of reality that
scientific inquiry becomes impossible, or that we have to be relativists
(Phillips, 1992, p. 56).

Secondly, the relativist\'s claim that no generalisations are possible -
that the best the researcher can do is to offer an evocative account of
what has been seen for the reader\'s consideration - involves a category
error. It confuses the accurate reporting of a set of systematic
observations with the writing of a novel, play or film script. Unlike
poets,

qualitative researchers generally do intend for their findings to be
taken as veridical. To say that a description of a classroom . . . is
evocative but is not meant to be true or false is merely another
category mistake (it is to identify qualitative research as being
poetry, or something similar). Moreover, it is a mistake that is fatal
for qualitative research; if a qualitative description or analysis is
not true or false (i.e. these terms are not applicable to it), then the
issue of whether that description or analysis is to be believed or acted
upon cannot arise - it is not sensible to say that one believes the
lines by Keats, just as it is not sensible to say that one believes
Mozart\'s clarinet concerto and is prepared to base policy or social
intervention on it (Phillips, 1987, p. 9-10).

Thirdly, if the members of each social group (and this includes groups
of researchers) construct their own realities, then it cannot be claimed
(by relativist researchers), that relativism is the only appropriate
epistemological position (for all researchers). "If all statements are
true relative to a social group as opposed to being objectively true for
all people, then the interpretivist claim that \'all knowledge is
relative to a social group\' is itself relative to the social group to
which the interpretivist belongs. This being so, it need not be taken
seriously by those researchers who do not subscribe to the claim"
(Clark, 1997, p. 41). However, relativists frequently argue, somewhat
illogically, that "their viewpoint is true, that is, true for everyone
and not just for them. . . . no relativist would accept the argument
from a colleague who had presented an incorrect or faulty piece of work
that \'It is only faulty or incorrect for you, but from my perspective
it is sound\'" (Phillips, 1987, p. 24).

In short, the relativist position is fatal for research. If observers
from different social groups, or observers with different
epistemological beliefs, cannot, in principle, reach agreement about
what they have seen (when observing particular instances of learning and
teaching) then it follows that the systematic observation of instances
of learning and teaching is pointless. If, as a result of systematic
observation, no generalisations about learning and/or teaching are
possible, then the research endeavour itself is pointless.


#### References

-   Clark, J. (1997). Educational research: Philosophy, politics,
    ethics. Massey University, Palmerston North, NZ: ERDC Press.
-   Eisner, E. W. (1991). The enlightened eye: Qualitative inquiry and
    the enhancement of educational practice. New York: Macmillan
    Publishing Co.
-   Guba, E. G. (1990). Subjectivity and objectivity. In E. W. Eisner
    & A. Peshkin (Eds.), Qualitative inquiry in education: The
    continuing debate (pp. 74-91). New York: Teachers College Press.
-   Kirk, J., & Miller, M. L. (1986). Reliability and validity in
    qualitative research. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage Publications.
-   LeCompte, M. D., & Preissle, J. (1993). Ethnography and qualitative
    design in educational research (2nd ed.). San Diego, CA: Academic
    Press.
-   Lincoln, Y. S., & Guba, E. G. (1985). Naturalistic inquiry. Beverly
    Hills: Sage Publications.
-   Phillips, D. C. (1987). Philosophy, science and social inquiry:
    Contemporary methodological controversies in social science and
    related applied fields of research. Oxford, England: Pergamon Press.
-   Phillips, D. C. (1992). The social scientist\'s bestiary: A guide to
    fabled threats to, and defences of, naturalistic social science.
    Oxford, england: Pergamon Press.
