---
layout: default
title: "The learning outcomes hidden inside curriculum goals 
"
nav_order: Thelearningoutcomeshiddeninsidecurriculumgoals
has_children: true
---
# The learning outcomes hidden inside curriculum goals 


::: documentByline
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
:::

::: {#parent-fieldname-text-9b2717e1b6124f3e82227ab55ba3e798}
At the present time, the school curriculum groups the competencies which
are to be acquired during the school years into very broad collections
such as \"English\", \"Mathematics\", \"Science\" and so on. English
includes learning to interpret visual and oral presentations, learning
to read, learning to make spoken and visual presentations, and learning
to write. Mathematics includes the development of conceptual
understanding, operational fluency and problem solving skills in number,
algebra, geometry, measurement and statistics.

The achievement objectives listed within each of the learning areas are
very broad and lacking in specificity. Consider, for example, the
following Level 2 English achievement objective: \"Spells most high
frequency words correctly and shows growing knowledge of common spelling
patterns.\" Which high frequency words? How much is \"most\"? Is the
child expected just to spell these words correctly (no matter how
slowly), or correctly and quickly? Which common spelling patterns? How
is this growing knowledge to be demonstrated? How much knowledge is a
\"growing knowledge\"? Does this growing knowledge include an increasing
level of spelling fluency? Note also that the achievement of this
objective requires the prior achievement of a number of prerequisite
skills (such as the mastery of numerous phoneme grapheme equivalence
relations) but that these prerequisites are nowhere listed in the Level
1 curriculum.

The lack of specificity in the New Zealand curriculum generates a
cascade of difficulties which permeate the instructional design task,
lesson planning, the selection of suitable learning activities, the
day-to-day assessment of learner improvement, and the selection and
assessment of \"national standards\". It also generates enormous
difficulties for the educational researcher who is provided with almost
no guidance regarding the selection and assessment of valid learning
outcomes during experimental investigations of either school learning or
the relative effectiveness of different teaching strategies.

To illustrate the complexity of the task facing both the classroom
teacher and the teaching researcher this chapter analyses several
curriculum areas into their component skills in order to make clear the
various different types of learning outcomes which each curriculum area
involves. In the sections which follow we present structural analyses of
the interconnected learning outcomes which are involved in learning to
read, learning to write, and learning to find the sum of 2-digit
numbers. These are provided as illustrations of the work which still
needs to be done in identifying the learning outcomes which are implicit
in the \"achievement objectives\" listed in the New Zealand curriculum.
:::
