---
grand_parent: 'Learning processes, learning outcomes and phases of learning '
great_grand_parent: 'Important learning and teaching events '
great_great_grand_parent: 'Welcome to Teacher Education''s Core Knowledge and Skills.'
has_children: false
layout: default
nav_order: 2
parent: 'Basic types of acquisition outcomes '
title: 'The acquisition of new behaviours '
---
# The acquisition of new behaviours 


::: documentByline
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
:::

::: {#parent-fieldname-text-7c8c3295832f409e897433d893d5af30}
Some acquisition outcomes involve learning a response, behaviour, skill
or action which does not yet exist in the learner's repertoire. These
are behaviours and skills which the learner cannot yet perform even when
given a model to imitate. With this kind of learning outcome, the change
which the learner must accomplish is a change from being unable to
perform the target behaviour or skill (even if provided with a model to
copy) to being able to perform the target behaviour without assistance.

This is the kind of behaviour change which is involved in early language
acquisition. Initially, the young infant cannot pronounce intelligible
words and phrases even when provided with models of words and phrases by
parents and caregivers. The mother says "bottle" but the baby does not
and cannot say "bottle". Eventually, however, the infant acquires the
ability to accurately copy the verbal responses of parents, siblings and
caregivers. Learning new pronunciations is also involved in second
language learning.

This is also the kind of behaviour change which is involved during the
acquisition of many motor skills (e.g. learning to walk, to run, to
climb stairs and so on). Every infant passes through a stage where they
can stand, but they cannot walk. Although other household members
repeatedly model walking about, the infant cannot, initially, take even
one unaided step without falling over. With practice however, the child
acquires the ability to walk as competently as everyone else.

The most common classroom example of this kind of learning outcome is
the teaching of handwriting. Initially, the young child cannot even draw
a straight line and providing the child with a model of a letter or a
word to copy does not function to prompt a competent copying response.
It is only with practice that the young child acquires the ability to
make an accurate copy of each of the letters and only with further
practice that the child acquires the ability to print the letters
without a model to copy.

Many gross motor skills and fine motor skills are acquired only as a
result of extensive practice and shaping by the physical and social
environment. This is true of early locomotion and swimming skills; it is
true of early copying, printing, drawing and painting skills; it is true
of catching, throwing, batting and other ball handling skills; it is
true of gymnastic and sports skills of many kinds and it is true of many
early self-care skills such as using a knife and fork, putting on items
of clothing, filling a cup and so on. Older learners also face learning
tasks in which competent performance can only be acquired as a result of
extensive practice. Examples include learning how to ride a bike,
learning how to throw a pot on a potter\'s wheel, learning how to
perform a competent stroke in tennis or golf, learning how to execute a
smooth gear change in a car, and so on.

This kind of acquisition outcome is often referred to as "motor
learning" or as "skill learning" but, since it includes the early
acquisition of language, this does not seem a very appropriate label. We
will, therefore, refer to acquisition outcomes which cannot be
accomplished simply by presenting a model for the learner to imitate as
"the acquisition of new behaviours".

**Measuring the acquisition of new behaviours.** A person's ability to
perform a completely new behaviour such as printing letters accurately
is typically measured by observing and rating the quality of the
learner's performance. But it can also be measured by counting the
number of responses which achieve a given *critical effect*. Because the
rating procedure tends to be extremely unreliable, the second procedure
is the procedure of choice. The term critical effect refers to whether
or not the behaviour has the outcome which its performance was designed
to achieve. With saying a new word, the critical effect is
comprehensibility (which occurs only when pronunciation begins to fairly
closely approximate the conventional pronunciation). With printing, the
critical effect is legibility. For goal shooting, the critical effect is
getting the ball into the goal from a certain distance. For parking, the
critical effect is getting the car into the parking space without
damaging anything.

Having decided upon the critical effect, the second step is to design a
short test of improvement. In most cases, a set of approximately 10
trials will provide a measure which is sufficiently sensitive to show
whether or not improvements are occurring from day to day. Ten trial
tests are possible with the great majority of pronunciation, physical,
sporting and recreational skills. For example, it is possible to measure
performance on ten trials catching a ball from a particular distance, on
ten goal shooting trials, on ten trials putting a golf ball a certain
distance, on a ten-word printing test and so on.

To measure progress, the ten-trial test is completed by the learner at
some stage during each practice session. (It may, in fact, be part of
the practice). This will provide a measure of the *rate of improvement*
which is occurring with respect to the target behaviour. Increases (from
one observation to the next) in the number of responses which produce a
given critical effect (or which can be performed to a given standard)
will provide an accurate measure of rate of progress towards this kind
of teaching outcome.
:::
