---
layout: default
title: "How many observations should be made during the course of a change? 
"
nav_order: Howmanyobservationsshouldbemadeduringthecourseofachange
has_children: false
---
# How many observations should be made during the course of a change? 


::: documentByline
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
:::

::: {#parent-fieldname-text-f8912b91d6c14cf394dacb51876df681}
Observation of those behaviour changes which we commonly refer to as
learning may be made just once during the course of an investigation (as
when an investigator administers an achievement test at the end of a
unit of work) or they may be made many times (as when an investigator
administers 2-minute tests each day throughout a unit of work). This
distinction is illustrated in Table 3232

![Figure 3232. Examples of various observation procedures located on the
few to many observations
continuum](../../../../../../assets/images/Figure3232.png "Figure 3232. Examples of various observation procedures located on the few to many observations continuum"){.image-inline}

*Figure 3232. Examples of various observation procedures located on the
few to many observations continuum*

One of the issues which educational researchers have yet to resolve is
the question of how many observations of a particular event should be
made during the course of an investigation. This question is of
particular importance in research into learning and teaching because
teachers and teaching researchers are primarily interested in change --
the changes in pupil ability, competence, understanding, motivation,
attitude, and so on which result from various teaching activities and
practices.

It is well understood that *change cannot be described using a single
observation*. One cannot describe changes in the speed of a vehicle by
observing that vehicle on a single occasion. One cannot describe the
rate at which a plant is growing by measuring the height of the plant on
a single occasion. And one cannot describe any of the changes which we
refer to as learning by observing the learner\'s performance on a single
occasion. "Changes . . . of all kinds can only be understood after
successive observations on different occasions" (Maddox, 1993, p. 5).
For the researcher who is interested in studying learning or teaching,
one of the critical questions to be asked of any research procedure is;
"Will this procedure provide me with an adequate picture of the changes
which occur during my investigation?"
:::

::: referencesList
#### References

-   Maddox, H. (1993). Theory of knowledge and its dissemination.
    Castlemaine, Australia: Freshet Press.
:::
