---
grand_parent: 'How is learning to be observed and recorded? '
great_grand_parent: 'Types of research evidence '
great_great_grand_parent: 'Teacher Education''s Core Knowledge and Skills.'
has_children: false
layout: default
nav_order: 1
parent: 'What are the main issues in observing and recording learning? '
title: 'Indirect vs. direct measures of behaviour change '
---
# Indirect vs. direct measures of behaviour change


```yaml
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
```


Some observation procedures (such as asking people to describe events
which have already occurred) do not bring the researcher into direct
contact with the behaviour or behaviour change which is of interest.
Other observation procedures bring the observer into direct contact with
the behaviour or the behaviour change which is of interest. In other
words, the data which researchers collect may be arranged on a continuum
from data collected by *indirect* through to those collected by *direct
contact* with the events which are of interest. "Measurement is said to
be *direct* when the phenomenon that is the focus of the experiment is
exactly the same as the phenomenon being measured" (Johnston &
Pennypacker, 1993, p. 113). Social science researchers often use the
terms *high inference* vs. *low inference* *variables* to refer to the
indirect/direct distinction.

Table 3231 lists some of the types of data commonly collected by
educational researchers and indicates whereabouts on the indirect/direct
continuum each of these kinds of data are located.

![Figure 3231. Examples of various data types located on the indirect to
direct observation
continuum](../../../../../../assets/images/Figure3231.png "Figure 3231. Examples of various data types located on the indirect to direct observation continuum"){: .image-inline}

*Figure 3231. Examples of various data types located on the indirect to
direct observation continuum*

One of the problems which has never been satisfactorily solved by
educational researchers is the question of when it is appropriate to
substitute a verbal description of what someone did for a record
collected by direct observation. For example, an investigator might be
interested in a child\'s level of interest in reading. This could be
observed indirectly by asking the child\'s teacher to describe the
child\'s level of interest (as he or she perceives it), or it could be
observed directly by observing the child, recording the choices which
the child makes when given a free choice of activity in the classroom
and counting the occasions when the child chooses to read. Because the
former procedure is easier, less time consuming, and less expensive than
the latter, educational researchers often substitute verbal reports of
performance for direct observations of performance. The problem with
verbal reports of behaviour is that they tend to be less accurate (and
hence less believable) than records made by direct observation. Take for
example, a researcher\'s report of a description by a research
participant of something which the participant has seen. Such reports
are common in qualitative studies. But they would not be acceptable in a
court of law where they would be labelled as *hearsay* and ruled
inadmissible as evidence.

Why do verbal reports tend to generate data which is less accurate than
data collected by direct observation? This is because the accuracy of a
verbal report or recollection is influenced by a number of variables
which do not operate when the event of interest is observed directly.
The accuracy of a description of, say, a video record of an event is
primarily dependent upon the observation, analysis, and reporting skills
of the investigator. The accuracy of a verbal report of the same event
is affected not only by the reporting skills of the investigator but by
at least six other variables as well. These variables are as follows.

1.The extent to which the respondent actually noticed the events which
the investigator is interested in. If the participant has never counted
how often a particular child hits other children they will be unable to
answer, with any degree of accuracy, the question: "How often does this
child hit others?"

2.The degree to which the respondent is able to remember and recall what
happened. The details of most events are progressively forgotten with
the passage of time. If the participant is asked to describe events
which occurred more than 24 hours previously, there will be details
which the respondent will be unable to remember.

3.The respondent\'s level of motivation to provide the kind of detail
which the researcher seeks. If the respondent does not share the
researcher\'s commitment to a particular project, or the interview has
been going on for some time, the participant\'s responses will tend to
become shorter and less detailed.

4.The respondent\'s attitude towards or commitment to telling the truth.
If the researcher is inquiring about matters which the respondent does
not wish to disclose, then the respondent may provide an inaccurate or
even an untruthful response to the investigator\'s question.

5.The level of skill of the respondent in describing what they have done
or seen. Young children, for example, tend to provide much less accurate
reports because their level of oral language development is much more
limited. People who have had little practice in distinguishing between
and describing their feelings have difficulty in responding to questions
about feelings.

6.The level of skill of the respondent in making the distinctions which
the investigator wants them to make. An investigator who seeks to group
participant responses into the categories "evidence of coercive power
relations" and "evidence of non-coercive power relations", for example,
will have difficulty doing so if the participant does not make this
distinction and hence does not include (in their verbal report) the
details needed in order for the investigator to do so.

The distinction between data collected by indirect and by direct
observation procedures is an important one for all researchers. This is
because data collected by direct observation tends to be more believable
than data collected by indirect observation.


#### References

-   Johnston, J. M., & Pennypacker, H. S. (1993). Strategies and tactics
    of behavioral research (2nd ed.). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
    Associates.
