---
grand_parent: 'Shaping processes '
great_grand_parent: 'The conditions upon which learning depends '
great_great_grand_parent: 'Teacher Education''s Core Knowledge and Skills.'
has_children: false
layout: default
nav_order: 4
parent: 'How completely new behaviours and skills are acquired '
title: 'Conditions which can accelerate the acquisition of new behaviours '
---
# Conditions which can accelerate the acquisition of new behaviours


```yaml
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
```


Research has identified a number of additional conditions which,
although not essential for learning, may function to accelerate the rate
at which new behaviours and skills are acquired.

**1. Teaching the learner to describe the target behaviour**

Sometimes the learner is taught to recite a description of the movements
which go to make up the new performance. For example, the child who is
learning to write the letter U might be taught to say "Down and up and
down." The technical name for this technique is *correspondence
training.* It is also referred to as *self-instruction.* There is some
experimental evidence to suggest that correspondence training may speed
up the acquisition of new behaviours (Blandford & Lloyd, 1987; Vintere,
Hemmes, Brown, & Poulson, 2004; Ziegler, 1987). Presumably this is
because correspondence training allows the learner to self-evaluate
their own performance and their progress towards the goal of skilled
performance. Obviously this technique can only be used with older
learners, that is, learners who can quickly master the verbal
description of competent performance. Also, many motor skills are
virtually impossible to describe in words.

**2. The quality of the demonstrations/models provided**

A logical analysis of prompting indicates that prompts may vary with
respect to informativeness -- with written descriptions and oral
descriptions being less informative than video models and live models.
However, there has been little controlled research into the relative
effectiveness of different kinds of prompts in accelerating the
acquisition of completely new behaviours. Sometimes new performances can
be prompted using physical guidance. For example a coach may guide the
novice golfer's initial attempts to execute a stroke, or the teacher may
guide the novice printer\'s hand through the initial attempts to print a
new letter. Although this practice has been little studied, practising
teachers attest to its effectiveness presumably because it functions to
show the learner what a competent response "feels like" and hence
enhances the learner's ability to self-evaluate their own practice
responses.

**3. The extent to which troublesome components of the target skill are
identified for additional practice**

Sometimes there are particular parts or components of a skill which
prove particularly troublesome or difficult to master. For example, a
young child may be having difficulty in pronouncing the \|s\| sound, or
the novice typist may be having difficulty in mastering a particular key
stoke, or the novice soccer player may be having difficulty in trapping
a ball which has been passed to them. When this kind of difficulty
arises, coaches often schedule additional practice on the difficult
movement and this has been shown to be an effective technique (Alison &
Ayllon, 1980; Koop & Martin, 1983) provided the learner returns to
practising the entire skill as soon as the difficulty has been overcome.
Of course, some skills consist of components which cannot be practised
separately because they are part of a single co-ordinated movement. It
is not possible to practise just part of a forward roll for example.

**4. The type of practice schedule experienced**

The acquisition of new behaviours and skills almost always proceeds more
rapidly if the learner experiences frequent short practices (e.g. daily
practices) rather than longer, more widely spaced practices. This is
particularly true in cases where the teaching aim is to develop a higher
level of skill or fluency (Mayhall & Jenkins, 1977). For a review of
research on the spacing effect, see Dempster and Farris (1990).

**5. The quality of the feedback provided**

Feedback following practice responses can vary with respect to its
informativeness. Quite dramatic increases in the rate of acquisition of
new behaviours has been demonstrated simply by increasing the quality of
the feedback which the learner receives following practice responses
(e.g., Trap, Milner-Davis, Joseph & Cooper, 1978).

**6. The extent to which the learner is able to self-evaluate their own
practice responses**

Sometimes the learner is taught how to self-evaluate their own practice
responses. For example, the novice printer can be shown how to use
acetate copies of letters to evaluate the accuracy of their printing
attempts, the novice sportswoman can be taught how to administer their
own ten-trial tests, and so on. The advantage of teaching the learner
how to evaluate their own performance is that this frees the learner to
engage in independent practice instead of having to wait until a teacher
or coach is available to evaluate their performance (Sweeney, Salva,
Cooper & Talbert-Johnson, 1993). This allows learners to practise on
their own and hence to make faster rates of progress.


#### References

-   Allison, M. G., & Ayllon, T. (1980). Behavior coaching in the
    development of skills in football, gymnastics, and tennis. Journal
    of Applied Behavior Analysis, 13, 297-314.
-   Blandford, B. J., & Lloyd, J. W. (1987). Effects of a
    self-instructional procedure on handwriting. Journal of Learning
    Disabilities, 20, 342-346.
-   Brown, R. E., Copeland, R. E., & Hall, R. V. (1986). Effects of
    principal implemented procedures on student acquisition of
    multiplication facts. Education and Treatment of Children, 9,
    202-220.
-   Dempster, F. N., & Farris, R. (1990). The spacing effect: Research
    and practice. Journal of Research and Development in Education, 23,
    97-101.
-   Koop, S., & Martin, G. L. (1983). Evaluation of a coaching strategy
    to reduce swimming stroke errors with beginning age-group swimmers.
    Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 16, 447-460.
-   Mayhall, W. F., & Jenkins, J. R. (1977). Scheduling daily or
    less-than-daily instruction: Implications for resource programs.
    Journal of Learning Disabilities, 10, 159-163.
-   Sweeney, W. J., Salva, E., Cooper, J. O., & Talbert-Johnson, C.
    (1993). Using self-evaluation to improve difficult-to-read
    handwriting of secondary students. Journal of Behavioral Education,
    3, 427-443.
-   Trap, J. J., Milner-Davis, P., Joseph, S., & Cooper, J. O. (1978).
    The effects of feedback and consequences on transitional cursive
    letter formation. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 11, 381-393.
-   Vintere, P., Hemmes, N. S., Brown, B. L., & Poulson, C. L. (2004).
    Gross-motor skill acquisition by preschool dance students under
    self-instruction procedures. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis,
    37, 305-322.
-   Ziegler, S. G. (1987). Effects of stimulus cueing on the acquisition
    of ground strokes by beginning tennis players. Journal of Applied
    Behavior Analysis, 20, 405-411.
