---
grand_parent: 'Learning interactions and their component events '
great_grand_parent: 'Important learning and teaching events '
great_great_grand_parent: 'Welcome to Teacher Education''s Core Knowledge and Skills.'
has_children: false
layout: default
nav_order: 4
parent: 'Practice responses '
title: 'Types of practice opportunities '
---
# Types of practice opportunities


```yaml
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
```


Different practice stimulus modes may be combined with different
practice response modes to produce a variety of different kinds of
practice stimulus--\>practice response combinations.

There is no ordinary language term for "stimulus-response combinations"
and various technical terms (e.g. "learning channels") have been
proposed. We will refer to the various practice stimulus--\>practice
response combinations as *types of practice opportunities*. Many of
these types of practice opportunities are so common that they have their
own names. For example, when the practice stimulus takes the form of
printed words and the practice response is "saying the words" the
resulting responses are called *reading* responses.

Some of the most common types of practice opportunities together with
their common names are listed below.

![Figure 2454. Some common types of practice opportunities (practice
stimulus--\>practice response
combinations)](../../../../../../assets/images/TECKSFig2454.png "Figure 2454. Some common types of practice opportunities (practice stimulusâ€“>practice response combinations)"){.image-inline}

*Figure 2454. Some common types of practice opportunities (practice
stimulus--\>practice response combinations)*

The kind of practice opportunity which is provided may or may not
correspond with the learning outcome which the teacher is aiming for. If
the aim is to help the learner improve their performance of some kind of
skill, for example, then the learner may experience the opportunity to
practice that skill or the learner may be given the experience of
listening to talk about how to perform the skill. Although there has
been little research, it seems reasonable to assume that the achievement
of a given learning outcome is more likely to occur if the practice
opportunity experienced by the learner matches the stimulus--\>response
mode which will be used in assessing the learner's achievement.

There is, as yet, no agreed technical term for the match between
practice opportunity and learning outcome and this hinders discussion
and analysis of this important learning variable. Nor have learning
psychologists developed an agreed procedure for measuring, and hence
describing, the degree of match between particular practice
opportunities and particular learning outcomes. This is unfortunate
given the obvious importance of this variable in the selection of
effective learning activities.
