---
layout: default
title: "The units of analysis employed by ethnographers 
"
nav_order: Theunitsofanalysisemployedbyethnographers
has_children: false
---
# The units of analysis employed by ethnographers 


::: documentByline
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
:::

::: {#parent-fieldname-text-39b5fb092c5148169fb679fa45bf83ad}
Ethnographers do not consider their subject matter to consist of parts
or elements. In fact, ethnographers often argue that the context or site
which is being investigated must be studied as a whole and that the aim
of the investigation is to provide a holistic account of the culture at
that site. This point of view is supported by arguing that, in a social
context, the whole is often more than the sum of its parts, and that any
attempt to study just certain parts of a social organisation precludes
development of an understanding of the organisation and functioning of a
social group as a social group.

Notwithstanding this argument, qualitative researchers do, in fact,
employ units of analysis and the procedure for creating these units is
described in most qualitative methods texts. The procedure (which is
often referred to as *unitising*) involves the division of field notes,
interview transcripts and written documents into text fragments. These
text fragments tend to be relatively small (phrases, sentences, or
paragraphs) which are meaningful on their own. So it can be seen that
qualitative researchers do divide their subject matter into elements,
the elements being single topic descriptive statements or single topic
participant statements.

Once the field notes and interview transcripts have been unitised, these
units are normally coded. However, these units are not coded or grouped
into any kind of agreed or standard categories. The qualitative
researcher is free to generate whatever kinds of groupings or categories
he or she considers to be appropriate to the current investigation.

Because there are no rules regarding the classification of text
passages, qualitative researchers tend to group the elements of their
subject matter into categories which are mostly natural language
categories. LeCompte and Preissle (1993) give the following as examples
of the kinds of categories that might be used: classes of behaviour
(e.g., behaviour, knowledge, opinion, sensory, feeling, demographic),
classes of meaning (e.g., descriptive, constructs, comparisons,
interpretations), and classes of events (e.g., acts, activities,
meanings, participation, relationships, settings). Bogdan and Biklen
(1998) discuss coding categories under the following headings: setting,
world view, perspectives of the participants, ways of thinking about
people and objects, processes (sequences of events), activities
(recurring types of behaviour), events, strategies (the way people get
things done), relationships and roles, and methods (researcher
comments). These examples suggest that the categories used by
qualitative researchers are primarily everyday language categories and
that they are primarily structural categories rather than functional
categories.

Could the unitising and coding procedures of the qualitative researcher
conceivably operate to generate new insights regarding the different
kinds of learning which need to be distinguished, or the events,
experiences, or elements of teaching practice which need to be provided
on order for individual learners to achieve particular kinds of learning
outcomes? This seems extremely unlikely.

First, the units of the qualitative researcher are pieces of text
(usually descriptions of actions or events) which are meaningful or
interpretable without further information. These units do not need to
include information about the context of the action, its purpose, or its
consequences. Using this criterion on its own means that any event, no
matter how trivial, could be captured for analysis by a qualitative
researcher, for example, "At 10.32 a.m. Mary gazed out the window."
Without some criteria for selecting units (types of events) which are
*likely* to be related to learning, it is difficult to envisage how this
procedure could possibly identify events which are *in fact* important
for learning.

Secondly, qualitative researchers have developed no agreed procedures
for grouping or categorising different kinds of learning outcomes or for
grouping or categorising events which might be related to learning. The
qualitative researcher is free to select whatever categories seem most
appropriate at the time. This failure to develop standard or agreed
categories has resulted in a set of uniquely organised research reports
none of which can be compared directly with the results of any other.
Each report may be interesting in its own right, but the corpus or
library of reports do not add up to produce an improved understanding of
educational practice. "Comparative researchers have been hampered by the
tendency of investigators to proceed idiosyncratically, studying
whatever interests them without specifying the perceptual and analytic
units which guide their data collection and analysis" (LeCompte &
Preissle, 1993, p. 241).

Thirdly, qualitative researchers have developed no agreed set of
taxonomic terms which can be used to refer to the categories of events
described in their reports. This greatly hinders the identification of
shared insights, commonalties, or generalisations across individual
investigations. "Is it reasonable to expect the findings of research to
accumulate when the research is conducted under the aegis of different
theories, using different core concepts and different instruments to
measure or describe the variables?" (Eisner, 1991, p. 209).

In short, the analytic units of the qualitative researcher are the most
primitive of all the analytic units currently used by educational
researchers. It seems highly unlikely that a procedure which identifies
social events without reference to learning or teaching and then
classifies these events in whatever manner the researcher chooses, could
conceivably result in generalisations about learning and/or teaching or
any other kind of knowledge which will be of enduring use to teachers.
:::

::: referencesList
#### References

-   Bogdan, R. C., & Biklen, S. K. (1998). Qualitative research for
    education: An introduction to theory and methods (3rd ed.). Boston:
    Allyn and Bacon.
-   Eisner, E. W. (1991). The enlightened eye: Qualitative inquiry and
    the enhancement of educational practice. New York: Macmillan
    Publishing Co.
-   LeCompte, M. D., & Preissle, J. (1993). Ethnography and qualitative
    design in educational research (2nd ed.). San Diego, CA: Academic
    Press.
:::
