# Productive research uses research methods which are fit for purpose \n

::: documentByline
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
:::

::: {#parent-fieldname-text-910c1c365bf54de996506141cdab4c58}
Education consists of a number of disparate disciplines (educational
philosophy, history, sociology, psychology, assessment, human
development, learning, curriculum studies, methods of teaching, and so
on) (de Landsheere, 1997). "The AERA . . . is subdivided into 12
sections and 128 special interest groups by both discipline and
differing subjects of study" (Lagemann, 2000, p. 240). Specialists in
each of these fields tend to study different kinds of questions and, to
a considerable degree, study these questions using rather different
kinds of research methods (Keeves, 1997). This means that there is no
common training which can be provided for education researchers, only
training which is appropriate to research in educational history,
educational sociology, human development, human learning, and so on. The
teachers and postgraduate students in university schools of education do
not become researchers by becoming competent in some generic set of
educational research methods but by becoming competent in the research
methods which are required in order to make significant advances in
their chosen field of research.

In some disciplines such as biochemistry, only scientific modes of
inquiry are judged to be appropriate. In some disciplines (e.g. history)
only descriptive modes of inquiry are possible. In many educational
disciplines (e.g. human learning) both pre-scientific and scientific
modes of inquiry are possible and both have their advocates, so the
novice researcher must make an informed choice with respect to which
kind of inquiry their research career will be based upon. This in turn
requires a research methods preparation which will enable an informed
choice to be made.

The pre-scientific modes of inquiry (such as ethnographic and other
types of descriptive inquiry) can be mastered fairly quickly and it is
this feature which seduces many novice researchers into so called
"qualitative" research. The inclusion of low level descriptive accounts
of existing activities within the definition of "research" has increased
considerably as increasing numbers of teacher educators have become
involved in research. In 1987, 28 per cent of papers presented by New
Zealand researchers at their annual NZARE conference used a descriptive
research method, and 23 per cent employed a correlational or
experimental method (Church, 1988). By 2005, 70 per cent of papers
presented at the annual NZARE conference used a descriptive method and
only 12 per cent used a correlational or experimental method. This
increase in the relative proportion of descriptive research (often
erroneously referred to as "qualitative research") is apparent in a
number of educational research journals (Church 1998) and it is apparent
across a number of English speaking countries (Department of Education,
Science and Training, nd).

Senior students who wish to pursue questions about learning or teaching
which require correlational, experimental or statistical methods of
analysis are now finding that the necessary training is often
unavailable. Until very recently, the main research methods course at
Canterbury provided no training in epidemiological, correlational, or
experimental research and no training in the different kinds of
knowledge generated by different research methodologies.

The scientific modes of inquiry take much longer to master and this is
one of the major reasons why the move by teacher educators into research
during the past 20 years has tended to be a move into descriptive modes
of inquiry rather than a move into scientific modes of inquiry. One of
the disadvantages of descriptive modes of inquiry is that the return for
research effort tends to be very small (Church, 1998). That this is so
can been seen from the fact that there are no textbooks summarising the
results of more than 30 years of qualitative research into learning and
teaching.

One of the advantages of scientific modes of inquiry is that results
tend to accumulate and to result in the development of theories which
can be used to make predictions about what does and does not result in
learning for children at the various age levels. A clear demonstration
of this kind of development can been seen in this website. It can also
be seen in the textbooks summarising the results of the learning (and
teaching) research undertaken by behaviour analysts during the past 30
years (e.g. Alberto & Troutman, 1999; Catania, 1992; Gardner et al.
1994; Grant & Evans, 1994; Malott, Whaley & Malott, 1993; Sulzer-Azaroff
& Mayer, 1991; Wolery, Bailey & Sugai, 1988).

Because educational researchers have developed a variety of different
kinds of research methods with which to study learning and teaching,
students, teachers and teacher educators who are coming to research for
the first time face critical choices with respect to both the content of
their research and the methods which they will employ to study this
content. In most fields, the content (the research question) is usually
selected first and a research method then devised which might possibly
provide an answer to the question. In other words researchers in the
fields which employ a scientific approach try to select research methods
which are fit for purpose and which, as a consequence, could possibly
supply an answer to the research question (Ercikan & Roth, 2006;
Raudenbush, 2005). Until educational researchers begin to do the same,
much research time, effort and money will continue to be wasted.

We will know that the transition to evidence-based practice has begun
when the great majority of researchers, whether they be students or
teachers, are not only selecting research questions which could result
in an advance in our understanding but are also choosing to study this
question using a research method which is fit for the purpose.

The critical choices which are involved in selecting a research method
which is fit for purpose are described in Book 3 of this website.
:::

::: referencesList
#### References

-   Alberto, P. A., & Troutman, A. C. (1999). Applied behavior analysis
    for teachers (5th ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
-   Catania, A. C. (1992). Learning (3rd ed.). New York: Prentice Hall.
-   Church, R. J. (1988). Educational research in Australia and New
    Zealand: Priorities and practices. Paper presented to the annual
    conference of the N. Z. Association for Research in Education,
    Palmerston North, New Zealand.
-   Church, R. J. (1998). The utility of qualitative, social science,
    and behaviour analysis research into learning and teaching. Paper
    presented to the annual conference of the N. Z. Association for
    Research in Education, Dunedin, New Zealand.
-   de Landsheere, G. (1997). History of educational research. In J. P.
    Keeves (Ed.), Educational research, methodology, and measurement: An
    international handbook (2nd ed., pp. 8-16). Oxford:
    Pergamon/Elsevier Science Inc.
-   Department of Education, Science and Training. (nd). The impact of
    educational research. Australian Government: Department of
    Education, Science & Training. Retrieved 5 July, 2005 from
    http://www.dest.gov.au/archive/highered/respubs/impact/overview.htm
-   Ercikan, K., & Roth, W. (2006). Constructing data. In C. F. Conrad
    & R. C. Serlin (Eds.), The Sage handbook for research in education:
    Engaging ideas and enriching inquiry (pp. 451-475). Thousand Oaks,
    CA: Sage Publications.
-   Gardner, R., Sainato, D. M., Cooper, J. O., Heron, T. E., Heward, W.
    L., Eshleman, J., & Grossi, T. A. (Eds.). (1994). Behavior analysis
    in education: Focus on measurably superior instruction. Pacific
    Grove, CA: Brooks/Cole Publishing Co.
-   Grant, L., & Evans, A. (1994). Principles of behavior analysis. New
    York: HarperCollins College Publishers.
-   Keeves, J. P. (Ed.) (1997). Educational research, methodology, and
    measurement: An international handbook (2nd ed.). Oxford:
    Pergamon/Elsevier Science Inc.
-   Lagemann, E. C. (2000). An elusive science: The troubling history of
    education research. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
-   Malott, R. W., Whaley, D. L., & Malott, M. E. (1993). Elementary
    principles of behavior (2nd ed.). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice
    Hall.
-   Raudenbush, S. R. (2005). Learning from attempts to improve
    schooling: The contribution of methodological diversity. Educational
    Researcher, 35(5), 25-31.
-   Sulzer-Azaroff, B., & Mayer, G. R. (1991). Behavior analysis for
    lasting change. Fort Worth: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
-   Wolery, M., Bailey, D. B., & Sugai, G. M. (1988). Effective
    teaching: Principles and procedures of applied behavior analysis
    with exceptional students. Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
:::
