---
grand_parent: 'Verbal learning processes '
great_grand_parent: 'The conditions upon which learning depends '
great_great_grand_parent: 'Teacher Education''s Core Knowledge and Skills.'
has_children: false
layout: default
nav_order: 1
parent: 'How new knowledge responses are acquired '
title: 'Necessary condition 1. All essential information in a form which can be referred
  to repeatedly '
---
# Necessary condition 1. All essential information in a form which can be referred to repeatedly


```yaml
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
```


In seems reasonable to assume that only those students who have access
to every item of information listed in the teaching aim will be in a
position to acquire the knowledge responses which go to make up the aim
for that lesson or activity. Knowledge learning, like any other kind of
learning, requires a certain amount of practice. This means that the
learning resources which are provided for knowledge learning must be in
a form which the learner can refer to on a number of occasions. This
requirement can be met in a number of ways: by including, as part of the
learning resource, books, notes, diagrams, videos, or any other kind of
resource which the learner can refer to repeatedly.

Of course, it is only possible to ensure that each student has access to
the knowledge to be learned and remembered, if that knowledge has been
specified *prior to instruction*. There is no way of assessing the
progress which each student is making towards the learning goal unless
the learning goal has been specified. It is also impossible to undertake
useful research into the conditions necessary for knowledge learning
unless the knowledge learning goal has been specified prior to any
experimental analysis.

The notion that knowledge learning requires the student to have access
to the knowledge to be learned stands in sharp contrast to the view that
it is sufficient simply to set students to work on research and project
activities in which they search out project-relevant information for
themselves.

We have been able to identify no research studies which have compared
the relative effectiveness or efficiency, under conditions in which the
knowledge to be acquired is known and specified in advance, of (a)
providing the necessary resources and (b) setting students to discover
the necessary resources. Clearly this is a very serious shortcoming of
the research into learning and teaching.

One of the reasons why there has been so little improvement in the
teaching of knowledge responses is that most teachers do not specify
their teaching aims with respect to this kind of learning outcome prior
to instruction. As long as this practice persists, improvements in
knowledge teaching procedures are most unlikely to occur. It is not
possible to develop more effective teaching procedures unless student
learning is being measured and it is not possible to measure student
learning unless the teaching aim has been specified before teaching
begins.
