---
layout: default
title: "Welcome to Teacher Education's Core Knowledge and Skills. "
has_children: true
---

# Welcome to Teacher Education's Core Knowledge and Skills. 


::: {#parent-fieldname-description .documentDescription}
Please note that this site is under construction.
:::

::: {#parent-fieldname-text-cadb8950340044adb344a7e5c2b4baa9}
In this site we have attempted to bring together in one place the
scientific research on learning and teaching so that teachers, teacher
educators, and teaching researchers have a well organised and accessible
source of scientific information regarding what works and what doesn't
work in the classroom.

Creation of this site was motivated by three observations.

First, the teaching practices which occur in classrooms have changed
little during the past 80 years. Unlike medical practice, where the
traditional craft philosophy of patient care was gradually replaced by
the revolutionary new clinical science during the first half of the 20th
century, teaching practice has remained, to this day, a craft which has
been little influenced by the scientific research on learning and
teaching.

Secondly, very considerable advances have been made in the scientific
analysis of both learning and teaching.  However, this research tends to
be buried under a mountain of pre-scientific research and this makes it
difficult to find and difficult to use in the development of more
effective classroom teaching practices and programmes.

Thirdly, the most accurate and reliable knowledge presently being
generated is that which is being generated by investigations which are
using controlled experimental procedures to study learning and teaching
processes.  Of course, this kind of research into learning and teaching
is just one of the many different kinds of research undertaken by
educational researchers. In this site, however, the primary focus will
be on the results of scientifically oriented investigations because it
is these which allow us to make predictions about what will work (and
who it will work for) and it is these results which speak most directly
to questions about how best to teach particular kinds of skills and
understandings to particular kinds of children and youth.

    -   By bringing together the scientific research into learning and
        teaching in a single site we hope to:
    -   provide teacher educators with a well organised and highly
        accessible source of reliable information regarding what works
        and what doesn't work -- reliable information which can be used
        as the basis for improvements in teacher education programmes.
    -   provide teachers and teacher educators who are interested in
        research with a clear road map regarding the questions which
        have already been studied by learning and teaching researchers
        and the questions which have yet to be studied in any systematic
        manner.
    -   demonstrate that it is possible for teachers (as well as
        researchers) to contribute to the advancement of knowledge by
        engaging in controlled experimental analysis of teaching and
        learning in their own classrooms.
    -   keep alive the possibility that teaching researchers might learn
        from the mistakes of the past 100 years by challenging those
        teachers and teacher educators whose thinking is still governed
        by pre-scientific ideas of human ability, learning, and teaching
        practice.

## Organisation of this site

Teacher Education's Core Knowledge and Skills is divided into nine major
areas (or "books") addressing nine key questions. These are as follows.

![ Figure 0001. Organisation of the TECKS
site.](../../../assets/images/tecks-fig-0001 "TECKS Fig 0001"){.image-inline}\
Figure 0001. Organisation of the TECKS site.

**Book 1:** The problem to be solved. Why has the scientific study of
learning lagged so far behind the other sciences?  Is a scientific study
of learning possible? Is a move from craft-based to evidence-based
teaching practice possible at this time?

**Book 2:** Key terms and concepts. What are the important learning and
teaching events which a science of learning and a technology of teaching
will need to distinguish between?

**Book 3:** Which research methods are proving to be most productive?
How has learning been studied in the past? What is to count as reliable
knowledge about the conditions necessary for learning?  Which research
methods result in new knowledge about learning processes and about the
relative effectiveness of different teaching procedures?

**Book 4:** Results of the research on learning. What have we discovered
so far about the conditions which function to maintain motivation, bring
about different kinds of learning, ensure remembering, and develop a
liking for particular kinds of learning activities?

**Book 5:** Results of the research on teaching.  What have we
discovered so far about the effects of particular teaching events and
teaching procedures on the development of motivation, on learning, on
remembering and on the development of a liking for particular learning
activities?

**Book 6:** Evidence-based teaching procedures and programmes. This
section will present the results of well controlled evaluations of the
various motivational and teaching procedures and programmes which have
been systematically evaluated to date.

**Book 7:** Learning how to teach. This section will address questions
about the conditions which must be provided in order for teacher
education students to acquire new knowledge about teaching and new
teaching competencies.

**Book 8:** Resources. This section is reserved for the fast publication
of learning experiments which have been undertaken by classroom
teachers, education students and teacher educators.

**Book 9:** Critical reviews.  This section is reserved for experiments
and literature reviews which challenge some of the pre-scientific ideas
and practices which stand in the way of evidence-based improvements in
classroom practice.
:::
