---
has_children: false
layout: default
nav_order: 2
title: 'Is the behaviour analysis approach a scientific approach? '
---
# Is the behaviour analysis approach a scientific approach? 


::: documentByline
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
:::

::: {#parent-fieldname-text-356cc76ebadc497498958451d09f10e8}
Behaviour analysts like to argue that their approach to the study of
learning and teaching is an example of a natural science.

It is characterized by a degree of internal coherence unmatched by other
subdisciplines. Its subject matter is carefully defined and generally
agreed upon by researchers within the field. Its methods of data
collection, analysis, and interpretation are also agreed upon to an
extent not found in other areas . . . Second, it is distinct from the
contemporary mainstream of experimental psychology in that its
historical influences have led to the development of a descriptive,
observational, and integrative system of inductively derived principles,
in contrast to the theory-driven, hypothetico-deductively derived,
statistical principles of most branches of experimental psychology
(Chiesa, 1994, p. 7).

The degree to which a discipline\'s experimental methods are judged
*scientific*, must first be based on the degree to which the discipline
explains, predicts, and controls its subject matter. The measurement and
analysis procedures used in both the experimental and applied branches
of the science of behavior have produced a large and growing body of
empirically sound, reliable data that are used regularly to predict and
control increasingly complex human behaviour of a wide ranging
topography and function. Therefore, it would seem that the methods
employed to produce those data be properly designated as scientific
(Heward & Cooper, 1992, p. 352).

One of the distinguishing characteristics of a natural science is that
it has an agreed procedure for classifying the main elements of its
subject matter. An examination of published behaviour analysis research
indicates that, unlike interpretive researchers and cognitive
scientists, behaviour analysts have developed an agreed procedure for
identifying and classifying (a) different types of behaviour change and
(b) elements of learner interactions which are critical for learning.
They have also developed an agreed set of terms (with agreed meanings)
for referring to the aspects of learning and teaching which they study.
Those relationships between learning history variables and behaviour
change which have been identified as recurring regularities have also
been given agreed upon names. The classifications of the behaviour
analyst may not be the "right" ones, or even the most useful ones, but
they are at least agreed upon by the great majority of behaviour
analysts. Nor, of course, do the classifications of the behaviour
analyst encompass all the different kinds of performances,
understandings, beliefs and feelings of which human beings are capable.
But this is also true of the constructs of cognitive science.

Another characteristic of a scientific approach is the development of
absolute scales of measurement and the development of measurement
procedures of known accuracy. Behaviour analysts distinguish between
direct and indirect measures of actions and feelings and they
distinguish between idemnotic and vaganotic measures of change.
Behaviour analysts prefer direct measures of behaviour change (because
the accuracy of these can be assessed) and they prefer idemnotic
measures of behaviour change (because such procedures generate
measurement results which can be compared directly from one study to the
next). Behaviour analysis methods texts always deal with these matters
in some detail.

The reliability and accuracy of the behaviour analyst's observations are
routinely assessed during the course of an investigation and are
routinely reported in research reports so that readers can draw their
own conclusion regarding the believability of the data being reported.
Behaviour analysts prefer experimental modes of analysis since these are
more likely to identify the conditions upon which learning depends than
are descriptive or correlational modes of analysis. Behaviour analytic
experiments are routinely replicated and the results of these
replication attempts are routinely reported in research reports so that
readers can draw their own conclusions regarding the believability of
the effects which have been described in the experimental report.

Hillix and Marx (1974, p. 264) following their review of psychological
theories came to the conclusion that behaviour analysis is "the closest
thing to a school or paradigm among all modern positions." Unlike the
cognitive scientist, the behaviour analyst is "consistent in attending
only to physical phenomena -- events that are known or at least strongly
suspected to exist. Furthermore, they attempt to explain physical
phenomena only in terms of other physical phenomena" (Johnston &
Pennypacker, 1993, p. 4). It is this factor, more than any other which
marks behaviour analysis as an example of a natural science.

William Verplanck who worked with B. F. Skinner, the father of behaviour
analysis, has written:

In the long run, the single-subject methodology of behavior analysis
will be accepted by others in the behavioral sciences because it works.
This will take time; how long will depend upon the quality and the
quantity of research done by behavior analysts doing their
single-subject thing. There are few sets of data in behavior-analytic
work to which inferential statistical methods can properly be employed.
And the group experimental methodology now dominant will be left to the
science of epidemiology, sociology, and the like which deal with the
behavior of groups and necessarily neglect the identity and
individuality of the individuals who are members of that group
(Verplanck, November 1998).

A similar view has been expressed by the author of one of the most
influential behaviour analysis textbooks. "The success of behavior
analysis will be measured by its survival in the behavior of those who
practice it and by the effectiveness of the behavior syntheses that
follow from it" (Catania, 1998, p. 376).
:::

::: referencesList
#### References

-   Catania, A. C. (1998). Learning (4th ed.). New York: Prentice Hall.
-   Chiesa, M. (1994). Radical behaviorism: The philosophy and the
    science. Boston: Authors Cooperative, Inc.
-   Heward, W. L., & Cooper, J. O. (1992). Radical behaviorism: A
    productive and needed philosophy for education. Journal of
    Behavioral Education, 2, 345-365.
-   Johnston, J. M., & Pennypacker, H. S. (1993). Readings for
    strategies and tactics of behavioral research (2nd ed.). Hillsdale,
    NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
-   Hillix, W. A., & Marx, M. H. (Eds.). (1974). Systems and theories in
    psychology: A reader. St. Paul, MN: West.
-   Verplanck, W. (12 November, 1998). Post to the Behavior Analysis
    List. (Now discontinued.)
:::
