---
layout: default
title: "The types of explanation sought by behaviour analysts 
"
nav_order: Thetypesofexplanationsoughtbybehaviouranalysts
has_children: false
---
# The types of explanation sought by behaviour analysts 


::: documentByline
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
:::

::: {#parent-fieldname-text-9668643d8228489d93dcccba2c8ba1dc}
The primary aim of behaviour analysis research is to identify functional
relationships between behaviour and the physical and social environments
in which it occurs.

Because behaviour analysts from Skinner onwards have argued against the
hypothetico-deductive method of theory building it is often assumed that
behaviour analysts are uninterested in theory development. This is not
true. Skinner was committed to the development of theory. "A theory is
essential to the scientific understanding of behavior as a subject
matter" (Skinner, 1947/1961, p. 230). What behaviour analysts have
avoided is theorising which attempts to explain behaviour in terms of
"events taking place somewhere else, at some other level of observation,
described in different terms, and measured, if at all, in different
dimensions" (Skinner, 1950/1961, p. 39).

The theory which is of interest to behaviour analysts is not the
speculative theory of the cognitive scientist but an inductively derived
theory, that is, theory which arises as a way of summarising the results
of large numbers of controlled observations. This approach to theory has
been summarised by Zuriff in the following way. "A formulation using a
minimal number of terms to represent a large number of experimental
facts is a theory. As the theory develops, it integrates more facts in
increasingly more economical formulations. Theoretical concepts thus
merely collate observations and do not refer to nonbehavioral processes.
A Skinnerian theory is, therefore, a simple, comprehensive, and abstract
description of a corpus of data" (Zuriff, 1985, p. 89). Behaviour
analytic theory, that is, the set of statements concerning the
relationships between particular classes of environmental events and
particular classes of behaviour are referred to by behaviour analysts as
*principles of behaviour*.

Behaviour analysts (like most natural scientists) work on the assumption
that the natural phenomena in which they are interested (behavioural
variability in individuals) is determined and that a search for the
determinants of behavioural variability is, therefore, a worthwhile
research endeavour. Determinism is assumed because, unless this is the
case, functional relationships cannot be discovered and research is
pointless. "If we are to use the methods of science in the field of
human affairs, we must assume behavior is lawful and determined. We must
expect to discover what a man does is the result of specifiable
conditions and that once these conditions have been discovered, we can
anticipate and to some extent determine his actions" (Skinner, 1953, p.
6).

For behaviour analysts, an account does not meet the definition of an
explanation unless it allows the scientist to predict future instances
of learning and to control future instances of learning (for example, to
control instructional variables to produce a particular kind of learning
outcome). The aim of behaviour analysis is to "predict and control the
behavior of the individual organism. This is our \'dependent
variable\' - the effect for which we are to find the cause" (Skinner,
1953, p. 35). The pursuit of this goal requires the behaviour analyst to
look for the causes of behaviour change amongst those events which might
allow both prediction and control, that is amongst the external
conditions of which behaviour may be a function (Hayes & Brownstein,
1986).

For the behaviour analyst, the development of particular ways of
behaving, thinking and feeling occurs, in part, as a result of biology
(the genetic template transmitted at conception) and, in part, as a
result of experience during the life of the individual. "Behavior is a
joint function of *phylogenic contingencies*, those that operated in
ancestral environments during the evolution of a species, and *ontogenic
contingencies*, those that operated during interactions between an
organism and its environment within its own lifetime" (Catania, 1998, p.
39). "Some aspects of behavior are highly determined by evolutionary
factors (e.g., the human vocal apparatus) and others by experience
(e.g., the human language one speaks)" (Catania, 1998, p. 371).

The origins of learned behaviours are conceptualised in evolutionary or
historical terms. For the behaviour analyst, the development of new
behaviours is a function of past experiences - especially the models
provided by other individuals and the contingencies of reinforcement and
punishment which have operated when particular kinds of responses have
been made in the past. Behaviour analysts assume that how a person
responds today (including the choices which he or she makes) is
determined by past experiences. "Behavior analysts think of the shaping
of behavior as working in just the same way as the evolution of the
species. Just as differences in reproductive success (fitness) shape the
composition of a population of genotypes, so reinforcement and
punishment shape the composition of an individual\'s behavior" (Baum,
1994, p. 64).

According to the behaviour analyst, the shaping of behaviour over time
is possible because (a) we engage in particular actions on many
occasions with the passage of time, (b) each time we engage in a
particular action there is some variation in its performance, and (c)
different versions of the same action are more or less successful (i.e.
result in different levels of reinforcement or punishment). In order to
study the shaping of behaviour, therefore, the investigator must (a)
monitor or track repeated instances of a given action over time (in
order to see whether it is being shaped), and (b) track the outcomes
(the success of that behaviour) each time it is performed (in order to
identify the events which are always present when particular kinds of
behaviour change occur). Elements of an individual\'s learning history
can only be studied by direct observation, they cannot be studied by,
say, interviewing the individual because individuals are unable to
recall (describe) each of the hundreds of interactions (and their
outcomes) which occurred during the shaping of a particular skill,
understanding, belief, or feeling.

Baum (1994) argues that, just as the theory of natural selection
provided the first scientific account of evolution and gradually
replaced pre-scientific explanations in terms of God\'s design,
intelligence, or purpose, so the historical explanations of the
behaviour analyst attempt to provide a scientific account of the origins
of behaviour and to replace pre-scientific explanations couched in terms
of individual design, intelligence, purpose, intention, soul, or mind.

The historical explanations of the behaviour analyst are quite different
from the intentional explanations of the interpretive researcher and the
intentional explanations of everyday language. They are also quite
different from the immediate cause, dispositional and mechanistic
explanations of the social scientist. Behaviour analysts take particular
care to avoid the practice, common in both everyday language and in much
psychological theorising, of attributing particular actions to internal
events, cognitions, traits, mediating processes, and other unobservable
fictions. Sometimes we say

that an idea, a feeling or a hunch led someone to do something. The
behaviorist doesn\'t dispute the existence of ideas, feelings and
hunches, but rather criticizes their invocation as causes of behavior. .
. . it isn\'t enough to say that someone did something because of an
idea, a feeling or a hunch. Ideas, feelings and hunches are about the
world and therefore must have their origins in our experiences with the
world. We must look further, to these past experiences . . . to account
for what we do. If we\'re successful, we may also have something useful
to say about the origins of our ideas, feelings and hunches (Catania,
1998, p. 4).

The historical explanations of the behaviour analyst have a number of
advantages for the researcher who is interested in the study of learning
and teaching. Historical explanations focus the investigator\'s
attention on the experiences and interactions which are likely to be
generating improvements in learner performance and understanding.
Historical explanations generate relational statements which can be
studied experimentally in an attempt to determine when, where, and to
whom they apply. Historical explanations of known generality can be used
to make predictions of the form that "if I provide such-and-such a set
of experiences then such-and-such a change in what this student can do
will result."

The behaviour analyst\'s historical explanations in a physical
vocabulary refer to observable events which teachers can do something
about. Because they enable predictions with respect to individual
learners, they are of far greater use to teachers than either
intentional explanations or mechanistic explanations. Teachers cannot
arrange for a child to have a particular perspective, mental structure,
memory, or mind. But they can arrange for a child to have a particular
set of experiences. So if particular kinds of learning turn out to be a
function of particular kinds of experiences then, once these
relationships have been identified, teachers will be able to arrange the
kinds of experiences which result in particular kinds of learning
outcomes with a much greater degree of certainty than they can at
present.

The search for historical explanations for learning "directs attention
toward functional school variables that can be modified by teachers
rather than toward hypothetical in-child (or family) dysfunctions and
\'causes\' that cannot" (Leach, 1996, p. 9).

Historical explanations are often difficult to grasp when first
encountered because they are so different from the intentional and
mentalistic accounts provided by the structure and concepts of everyday
language. Everyday language predisposes us "toward seeking explanations
in causes present at the moment of action. . . people are unaccustomed
to grouping actions along the lines of function - that is, along the
lines of what they accomplish, rather than how they look" (Baum, 1994,
p. 72). Just as mastery of the technical language of behaviour analysis
requires a certain amount of training so too does mastery of the ability
to look for the causes of behaviour change, not in the mind, memory or
perspective of the learner, but in the history of previous interactions
involving the skills, understandings and beliefs which are of interest.
:::

::: referencesList
#### References

-   Baum, W. M. (1994). Understanding behaviorism: Science, behavior and
    culture. New York: HarperCollins College Publishers.
-   Catania, A. C. (1998). Learning (4th ed.). New York: Prentice Hall.
-   Hayes, S .C., & Brownstein, A. J. (1986). Mentalism,
    behavior-behavior relations, and a behavior-analytic view of the
    purposes of science. The Behavior Analyst, 9, 175-190.
-   Leach, D. L. (1996). Applying behavioural psychology in education:
    Contributions and barriers to the implementation of effective
    instruction. Behaviour Change, 13, 3-19.
-   Skinner, B. F. (1947/1961). Current trends in experimental
    psychology. In B. F. Skinner, Cumulative record (Enlarged ed., pp.
    223-241). New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts.
-   Skinner, B. F. (1950/1961) Are theories of learning necessary?
    In B. F. Skinner, Cumulative record (Enlarged ed., pp. 39-69). New
    York: Appleton-Century-Crofts.
-   Skinner, B. F. (1953). Science and human behavior. New York: The
    Macmillan Co.
-   Zuriff, G. E. (1985). Behaviorism: A conceptual reconstruction. New
    York: Columbia University Press.
:::
