---
grand_parent: 'Approaches to research into learning and teaching '
great_grand_parent: 'Types of research evidence '
great_great_grand_parent: 'Welcome to Teacher Education''s Core Knowledge and Skills.'
has_children: false
layout: default
nav_order: 2
parent: 'What types of explanation are sought by the three main approaches to research? '
title: 'The types of explanation sought by cognitive scientists '
---
# The types of explanation sought by cognitive scientists


```yaml
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
```


Most cognitive scientists work on the presumption "that there are
general laws that hold across individuals" (Borg & Gall, 1989, p. 24)
and that the aim of research into an area such as learning and teaching
should be to develop theories which integrate all of the known facts
about these phenomena. Cognitive scientists use the term *theory* to
refer to a set of statements which identify the relationships between
the various constructs which go to make up their subject matter. "The
basic aim of science is to find general explanations of natural events.
Such general explanations are called theories" (Kerlinger, 1964, p. 10).
The discovery of such generalisations is considered to be important
because they permit prediction and control of the events which are of
interest (human behaviour). "The purpose of science is to establish
functional relationships among phenomena with a view to predicting and,
if possible, to controlling their occurrence" (Mouly, 1970, p. 39). The
types of generalisations which are of primary interest to the cognitive
scientist are generalisations regarding causal relationships (sometimes
referred to as functional relationships) at the population level. Social
scientists are relatively uninterested in the performance of
individuals.

When social scientists study effects, they study the effects of two main
kinds of variables: treatment variables and attribute variables.
"Treatment variables are those factors that the experimenter manipulates
and to which he or she assigns subjects" (Best & Kahn, 1993, p. 137).
Attribute variables are also referred to as organismic variables or as
assigned variables. "Attribute variables are those characteristics that
cannot be altered by the experimenter. Such independent variables as
age, sex, race, and intelligence level have already been determined, but
the experimenter can decide to include them or remove them as variables
to be studied" (Best & Kahn, 1993, p. 137). The use of attribute
variables as independent variables is a key difference between cognitive
science and behaviour analysis. For the cognitive scientist, variability
in a measure of performance (such as level of motivation) can function
as either a dependent variable (the variable to be explained) or as an
independent variable (a possible explanation). For the behaviour analyst
variability in a measure of performance can only function as a dependent
variable (the phenomenon to be explained).

Generally speaking the explanatory theories of cognitive scientists take
the form of immediate cause theories in a non-physical vocabulary. Two
types of explanation are common: dispositional explanations, and
mechanistic explanations.

**Dispositional explanations.** To account for the fact that the same
external event or stimulus may be responded to in different ways by
different individuals, the cognitive scientist often invents
hypothetical constructs which take the form of internal dispositions,
traits, motivations, and so on. These traits are introduced to bridge
the gap between experience and subsequent performance. "The scientist .
. . in order to study motivation . . . cannot measure it directly
because it is an in-the-head variable, an intervening variable, an
unobservable entity. Other men have invented the construct to stand for
\'something\' *presumed to be* inside the individual, \'something\'
prompting him to behave in such and such manner" (Kerlinger, 1964, p.
44). All explanations which attribute differences in performance to
differences in intelligence, ability, achievement motivation,
self-esteem, self-efficacy, locus of control, and so on are explanations
of this type.

**Mechanistic explanations.** An even more common way of accounting for
differences in human performance under test conditions is to use some
kind of mental structure or cognitive processing variable to bridge the
gap between experience and subsequent performance. This type of
explanation frequently takes the form of an attempt to build some kind
of mental *model.*

Many of these explanatory models are models of memory. Atkinson and
Shiffrin (1968), for example, hypothesised that performance on recall
tests depends upon the operation of a sensory register, a short term
store, a long term store, and a number of transient control processes.
The effect of past experience is to leave a trace, representation, or
memory in the long term store so that when the learner faces a similar
problem, the mind is activated, and the response is recalled.

Also popular are information processing models which assume that what is
recalled is a function of various mental processing activities which
occur during the input, processing, storage, and retrieval of new
information. "Most work in cognitive science assumes that the mind has
mental representations analogous to computer data structures, and
computational procedures similar to computational algorithms. Cognitive
theorists have proposed that the mind contains such mental
representations as logical propositions, rules, concepts, images, and
analogies, and that it uses mental procedures such as deduction, search,
matching, rotating, and retrieval" (Thagard, 1996). The aim of all of
these mental models is to explain

a behavioural system by specifying the component parts of its structure
just as a person examining a car would readily explain its action by an
appeal to its component parts. . . .The conditions that gave rise to
this structure or the ways we can manipulate it are irrelevant to the
description of the operation of the machine and predictions based upon
this description. . . . Thus, for mechanists, description and
theoretical prediction form an adequate basis for explanation (Hayes &
Brownstein, 1986, p. 180).

All explanations which attempt to account for changes in human
performance in terms of memory structures or processes, cognitive
structures or processes, mental structures or processes, or brain
structures or processes are of this type.

The main weakness of a mechanistic explanation is that, while it may
provide an adequate description of how the car (or remembering)
operates, it provides no explanation of how the car (or the memories)
came into existence in the first place. If the aim is to build a car (or
a learner who can do or remember certain things) then a structural or
mechanistic theory is insufficient.

If the aim is to develop a theory of learning, then structural models
also send us searching for the causes of behaviour change in the wrong
place: inside the head of the learner instead of in the interaction
between behaviour and the environment in which it is occurring.
"Behaving organisms, human or otherwise, are not mechanical structures
to be likened to telephone exchanges and networks, information
processing systems, computer storage banks and so on. They are
biological organisms that operate within a context that affects their
behavior and which they in turn have an effect upon and that are changed
by their experience in that context" (Chiesa, 1992, p. 1296). Ulric
Neisser, who has been sharply critical of behaviour analysis, has come
to much the same conclusion. "I think that \'memory\' in general does
not exist . . . It is a concept left over from a medieval psychology
that partitioned the mind into independent faculties: \'thought\', and
\'will\' and \'emotion\' and many others, with \'memory\' among them.
Let\'s give it up and begin to ask our questions in different ways"
(Neisser, 1982, p. 12). For Neisser, more useful questions would be
questions about the naturally occurring conditions under which people do
and do not remember different kinds of performances and understandings.

More importantly, the mental models of the cognitive scientist often
consist of mental structures and processes which cannot be observed,
even by the learner. Explanations which make use of mentalistic
constructs pose a particular difficulty for those who seek to apply
scientific methods to the study of learning. Mental fictions "offer for
study objects that cannot be observed. Neither memory nor mind can be
observed. How shall we study them?" (Baum & Heath, 1992, p. 1313). No
other science employs explanatory constructs couched in a non-physical
vocabulary. The use of hypothetical constructs which cannot be observed
creates numerous problems.

1\. The use of constructs which cannot be observed means that the
cognitive scientist is free to generate whatever constructs he or she
desires. Chiesa uses the example of research into remembering. When
observations of remembering revealed phenomena that were inconsistent
with the short-term/long term memory constructs, researchers such as
Baddeley and Hitch (1974) simply created additional constructs: the
central executive, the visuo-spatial scratchpad, the articulatory loop,
and so on (Chiesa, 1992, p. 1297).

2\. When instances of a construct cannot be observed, the social
scientist is free to attribute to the construct whatever properties he
or she desires. Referring to the Baddeley and Hitch model of
remembering, Chiesa observes that "Since all of the constructs of the
model are hypothetical, they may take on whatever features or properties
the scientist decides" (Chiesa, 1994, p. 156). This often results in the
construct being used to serve several different functions. For example,
cognitive scientists often fail to state whether they are using the name
of a particular construct to refer to (a) a particular category of
behaviours (e.g., "we measured *memory* for lesson content by . . .", or
(b) a particular process (e.g., "*memory* for lesson content is affected
by the meaning which the child constructs . . ."), or (c) a particular
structure or location (e.g., "this information is then transferred to
long-term *memory . . .*"), or (d) a cause, that is, the reason why
people engage in particular behaviours (e.g., "the learner is able to
recall lesson content more accurately when *memory* consists of a rich
network of connections").

3\. When a hypothetical construct takes the form of a mentalism it can
be (and often is) used not only as the name of a class of performances
but also as an explanation for that class of performances. "This is what
we did with the construct *instinct* years ago. We spoke of maternal
instinct as if it explained maternal behavior when, in reality, we had
simply exchanged one level of verbal ignorance for another - we had
described what we were alleging to explain" (Mouly, 1970, p. 60).

4\. It can be argued that the introduction of a mentalism serves no
scientific purpose. It violates the parsimony principle by complicating
rather than simplifying the scientist\'s account; it "increases the
mystery, rather than decreasing it" (Hineline, 1992, p. 1284). Let us
say that a researcher is interested in the question of whether the use
of concrete examples results in higher scores on tests of conceptual
understanding. If a series of experiments find this to be the case,
nothing is added to our understanding of this relationship by arguing
that the concrete examples produce stronger memory traces and that it is
these stronger memory traces which produce the higher average scores on
tests of conceptual understanding.

5\. It can also be argued that the introduction of a mentalism serves no
practical purpose. It introduces an hypothetical entity over which
parents, teachers, and therapists can have no influence. How is reading
to be improved if "the source of the problem is said to lie in a
malfunctioning articulatory loop? How would a . . . teacher restore to
full and proper functioning a hypothetical component?" (Chiesa, 1992, p.
1297).

The use of mental models and invisible mental processes as "causes" of
ability and disability has a particularly unfortunate side effect when
used in education.

When children regularly fail to meet expected academic standards, they
direct the attention of teachers and support staff towards a search for
explanations and causes for the \'failure\' that lie amongst children\'s
psychological, neurological, or information processing abilities. . . .
In isolation, they often lead to restatements of problems in global
categorical terms describing hypothetical dysfunctional syndromes (e.g.,
dyslexia, attention deficit disorder, learning disability). They rarely
lead to better decision-making, nor to more effective instructional
design and delivery for individual students . . . . Indeed, their net
result is to focus the attention of educators away from critical
analyses of their instructional practices and programs (Leach, 1996, p.
11).

Finally, the immediate cause explanations of the cognitive scientist
frequently involve a mediating entity which is a disposition or trait
which has been inferred from behaviour. These dispositional explanations
almost always involve a form of circular reasoning commonly referred to
as *reification*. First an aspect of performance is observed (e.g., a
lower than expected level of reading competence). Then the behaviour is
renamed (e.g., dyslexia). Then the new name is used as an explanation
for the originally observed performance. (This student has a lower than
expected level of reading competence *because* of his dyslexia.) Since
the dyslexia has been inferred *from the reading performance* this
explanation is tautological. (We might as well say that "the reason why
this student is reading at a low level is because I have seen him
reading poorly.")


#### References

-   Atkinson, R. C., & Shiffrin, R. M. (1968). Human memory: A proposed
    system and its control processes. In K. W. Spence & J. T. Spence
    (Eds.), The psychology of learning and motivation: Advances in
    research and theory (Vol. 2) pp. 89-105. New York: Academic Press.
-   Baddeley, A. D., & Hitch, G. J. (1974) Working memory. In G. H.
    Bower (Ed.), Recent advances in learning and motivation (pp. 47-89).
    London: Academic Press.
-   Baum, W. M., & Heath, J. L. (1992). Behavioral explanations and
    intentional explanations in psychology. American Psychologist, 47,
    1312-1317.
-   Best, J. W., & Kahn, J. V. (1993). Research in education (7th ed.).
    Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
-   Borg, W. R., & Gall, M. D. (1989). Educational research: An
    introduction (5th ed.). New York: Longman.
-   Chiesa, M. (1992). Radical behaviorism and scientific frameworks:
    From mechanistic to relational accounts. American Psychologist, 47,
    1287-1299.
-   Chiesa, M. (1994). Radical behaviorism: The philosophy and the
    science. Boston: Authors Cooperative, Inc.
-   Hayes, S .C., & Brownstein, A.J. (1986). Mentalism,
    behavior-behavior relations, and a behavior-analytic view of the
    purposes of science. The Behavior Analyst, 9, 175-190.
-   Hineline, P. N. (1992). A self-interpretive behavior analysis.
    American Psychologist, 47, 1274-1286.
-   Kerlinger, F. N. (1964). Foundations of behavioral research:
    Educational and psychological inquiry. New York: Holt, Rinehart and
    Winston Inc.
-   Leach, D. L. (1996). Applying behavioural psychology in education:
    Contributions and barriers to the implementation of effective
    instruction. Behaviour Change, 13, 3-19,
-   Mouly, G. J. (1970). The science of educational research (2nd ed.).
    New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold Company.
-   Neisser, U. (1982). Memory observed: Remembering in natural
    contexts. San Francisco: W.H. Freeman & Co.
-   Thagard, P. (1996). Cognitive Science. In N. Zalta (Ed.), Stanford
    Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Retrieved 15 January, 2001 from
    http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/cognitive-science/
