---
has_children: false
layout: default
nav_order: 3
title: 'Questions which can and cannot be addressed by ethnographic methods '
---
# Questions which can and cannot be addressed by ethnographic methods 


::: documentByline
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
:::

::: {#parent-fieldname-text-19a988fbda7e4f6e9a58b57f14bb0314}
Ethnographic research methods have a smaller role to play in the study
of settings in which learning and teaching occur. They are, however,
well suited to answering certain kinds of questions about these
settings. Ethnographic procedures are often appropriate when seeking an
answer to the question "What is going on here?" Ethnographic research
can provide information about what people do, how they interact with
each other, and what the consequences are of different courses of action
in particular settings. This information can serve as a base for
speculation regarding the particular events which need to be examined in
greater detail in future investigations.

Secondly, ethnographic procedures can also be appropriate when seeking
answers to questions about what is important in a particular setting.
For example, "What are the questions which we need to ask?" or "What are
the key variables which are operating in this setting?"

Thirdly, ethnographic procedures can be appropriate when seeking answers
to questions about what a person needs to know in order to function
effectively in a particular setting. Ethnography can often answer
questions about the social rules, the conventions and the contingencies
which operate in a particular setting. This kind of information is of
particular interest to behaviour analysts who are interested in
discovering how it is that people learn to engage in certain behaviours
but not others in particular settings. Fourthly, ethnographic research
can provide useful information regarding the perspectives of the
individuals who live or work in a particular context -- information
about whether, for example, they like or dislike what they are expected
to do, or what is happening to them, and why this might be the case.

There are also many kinds of questions which *cannot* be addressed using
ethnographic research procedures. Because ethnography examines only the
actions, meanings, and perspectives of individuals it cannot be used to
answer questions about the prevalence of particular beliefs, behaviours,
practices, or contingencies within a particular society or social group,
it cannot be used to identify the way in which resources are being
distributed across social groups, and it cannot be used to measure the
outcomes which are being achieved by groups or populations of learners,
teachers, classrooms, or schools. To answer these kinds of questions,
the researcher must employ the sampling procedures of the social
scientist.

In addition, ethnographic research is always descriptive. So it cannot
be used to answer questions which require an experimental analysis. It
cannot be used to answer questions about how learning occurs, questions
about the relative effectiveness of different kinds of teaching
materials or teaching procedures, or questions about the relationships
between particular teaching variables and particular learning outcomes.
Most importantly it cannot be used to answer questions about whether a
particular teaching programme or procedure is working and, if not, why
it is not working or how it could be made more effective.

Because the accuracy of the data collected during an ethnographic study
(and the validity of the conclusions drawn from that data) are always
open to question, ethnographic research cannot be used as the primary
methodology in any kind of high stakes research. It cannot be used to
measure the achievements of students or to collect data which may affect
the promotion, grading, or qualifications of students. It cannot be used
to measure teacher effectiveness or to collect data which may affect the
promotion, credentialing or employment conditions of teachers. And it
cannot be used to measure the effectiveness of particular kinds of
educational programmes or curricula or to collect data which may affect
the funding or the provision of the educational programmes being
provided to particular groups of students. In other words, ethnographic
research should not be used in any situation where the results of that
research could conceivably be used to support a case for a change in the
curriculum, a change in teaching materials, a change in the teaching
resources available for learners, or a change in the employment
conditions of teachers.
:::
