---
has_children: false
layout: default
nav_order: 12
title: 'The differential reinforcement of different performance dimensions '
---
# The differential reinforcement of different performance dimensions 


::: documentByline
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
:::

::: {#parent-fieldname-text-c8562a64401d4f098cbadb15306b86a3}
Most behaviours can vary along several different *dimensions*. Kicking a
football has both accuracy and force dimensions. We can reinforce
kicking *accurately* (kicking the ball in the right direction) or we can
reinforce kicking *forcefully* (kicking the ball far enough). Naming an
object has both a meaning dimension and a pronunciation dimension. We
can reinforce the child for using the *correct word* or for *pronouncing
it correctly.* Reading has both an accuracy and a fluency dimension. We
can react positively when the child reads the words *correctly* or when
the child reads *fluently*, that is, with sufficient accuracy and speed
to maintain comprehension.

Practice responses may be judged to be successful on the basis of
whether or not they are correct, whether or not they qualify as
improved, whether or not they are performed with sufficient force,
whether or not they are performed with sufficient creativity, whether or
not they are performed with sufficient beauty and style, and so on.

In order to specify a reinforcement contingency, therefore, it is always
necessary to specify the dimension or dimensions of behaviour which are
going to be differentially reinforced. While there are many dozens of
performance dimensions, three dimensions are of particular importance
during the childhood years. These are *productivity* (working quickly),
*accuracy* (responding correctly) and *fluency* (responding both
correctly and quickly).

Contingencies which result in the differential reinforcement of
productivity are contingencies in which attention to practice stimuli,
engagement with learning tasks, staying on task, and completing assigned
tasks are differentially reinforced.

Contingencies which result in the differential reinforcement of accuracy
are contingencies in which correct responses and correctly performed
procedures are differentially reinforced. For example we may
differentially reinforce improvements in printing accuracy, or in the
number of words correctly spelled or in the number of maths problems in
which an appropriate procedure was used to arrive at the correct answer.

A third dimension of classroom performance is the *fluency dimension*,
that is, accurate and speedy responding. One of the characteristics of
mastery is that correct responses can be recalled very quickly --
without having to spend any time thinking through or working out the
answer. Where the objective of practice is to develop mastery, then it
is improvements in the speedy performance of correct responses which
needs to be differentially reinforced.
:::
