---
grand_parent: 'The problem to be solved '
great_grand_parent: 'Welcome to Teacher Education''s Core Knowledge and Skills.'
has_children: false
layout: default
nav_order: 4
parent: 'The transition from craft to science '
title: 'Recognising the constraints posed by the nature of classroom work '
---
# Recognising the constraints posed by the nature of classroom work


```yaml
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
```


Classroom teaching is a task which looks easy -- because the *content*
of that teaching is something which we have all experienced (Labaree,
2004). It is, however, an enormously complex task. The classroom teacher
spends his or her day trying to keep order and foster learning in 25 to
30 children with a diverse range of background experiences and ability
levels. Learning is likely only if the teacher can keep order and
develop a relationship of trust with each child. This is a task which is
far more complex that that required of a general practitioner who has
only to attend to one patient at a time and who can refer all difficult
problems to a specialist.

Surveys from a number of Western countries have found that teachers on
average work 50 or more hours per week (Alberta Teachers Association,
nd; Livingstone, 1994; Michelson & Harvey, 2000). During term time there
is little or no time for preparation and during the course of the entire
school year half the available time has to be spent in class contact
leaving only one hour per hour of contact for all marking, preparation,
and extra curricular activities. This means that most teaching has to be
done on the run, with little or no preparation. Because there are 25 to
30 children, small group teaching becomes possible only if the teacher
generates enough materials and activities to keep all of the other
children in the class occupied during the small group sessions. Because
classroom teaching has to be carried out continuously with 25 to 30
children simultaneously, the amount of individualisation which is
possible is virtually nil (Brophy, 1983). In other words "teachers' work
environments are not conducive to the implementation of research
knowledge. Factors such as externally imposed curriculums and materials,
relative isolation, and lack of collegiality, heavy workloads, ambiguity
about goals, and insufficient time and resources combine to limit
teacher incentive and flexibility for learning about or trying
research-based innovations" (Malouf & Schiller, 1995, p. 417).

Now consider the results of the scientific research on teaching. One of
the things which we have learned from this research is that children
learn more when teachers pay greater attention to detail, when teaching
procedures are changed to match the type of learning outcome which is
being pursued, when the content of instruction is adapted to take into
account individual differences in prior learning, and when progress is
monitored and teaching adapted for the children who are making less than
expected progress (Church, 2004). This is the evidence base.

On the surface this looks as if a move to evidence-based practice would
involve even more work than craft-based practice. So how are teachers to
be motivated to adopt new practices? Many procedures have been
suggested: the introduction of incentive systems, reduced class sizes,
the introduction of accountability systems, the introduction of field
tested teaching materials and so on.

**Motivating change by introducing teaching awards**

One of the suggestions for motivating teachers to engage in more
effective teaching practice is by the introduction of some kind of award
or reward for "excellence in teaching". Some of these schemes involve
merit awards, some involve access to professional development leave,
some involve bonus payments and some involve accelerated promotion.

It does not take a great leap of logic to figure out that an award
scheme which rewards only selected teachers cannot result in a general
improvement in teaching practice on the part of all teachers. In order
to motivate change in the classroom teaching practice of all teachers we
would need an award scheme which could be applied to all teachers. Once
the award is one which can be earned by all teachers, it is highly
likely that, over a period of time all teachers would earn it. If the
award scheme involves any kind of financial incentive, we end up
suggesting that all teachers should be eligible for extra pay for doing
what they have been employed to do, that is, to ensure that all of the
children in their care make expected rates of progress in each
curriculum area.

**Motivating change by reducing class sizes**

A second suggestion for improving classroom practice is to reduce class
sizes. The research on class size effects is reasonably extensive and
has been summarised by several research teams (e.g., Hanushek, 1999;
Hattie, 2005; Wößmann & West, 2006). The overall finding from these
studies of class size effects is that the effect of a reduction in class
size on student achievement is very small and that larger effects can be
obtained by providing teachers with well designed professional
development or well designed teaching materials. Hattie argues that the
reason why the effect is so small is because teachers do not change
their behaviour simply because the number of students has been reduced.
"Teachers teach similarly in classes of 15 as in classes of 30, and the
grammar of schooling does not change (for the teacher or student). We
therefore should not be surprised to find that teachers teach and
students learn similarly regardless of class size" (Hattie, 2005, p.
407). As might be expected, class size effects tend to be larger in
countries where teachers are poorly trained and in schools with higher
levels of diversity in student ability. Reducing class size is also a
very expensive policy to implement -- much more expensive than improving
the quality of the teaching materials available to teachers.

**Motivating change by introducing accountability systems**

It has been widely argued by certain political groupings that we can
motivate teachers to adopt teaching practices which are more effective
in raising achievement levels by introducing standards which children
are required to meet and by holding teachers accountable for ensuring
that every child meets these standards. A National Standards requirement
for all primary school children was introduced in New Zealand in 2010
with schools being required to report the numbers of children above, at,
or below the national standard at each age level in reading, writing,
and mathematics.

Similar systems were introduced in the UK and in a number of US states
during the 1990s so the likely effect of the New Zealand system can be
predicted from the effects observed in the UK and the US.

In the UK, effects differed from those expected. It is certainly the
case that the introduction of a national testing scheme resulted in
annual increases in test scores across England. However, research
suggests that these increases probably reflect nothing more than
increased time spent preparing for the tests. "What is most likely to
have led to increases in scores, is practising for the tests. All
international research evidence . . . suggests that this is what happens
when 'high stakes' tests are encountered in educational systems; i.e.
when teachers and students are faced with tests which carry significant
consequences for student life chances and teacher accountability, very
significant time and energy will be devoted to test preparation"
(Torrance, 2002, p. 8).

Torrance presents further evidence to suggest that the national testing
system in the UK has resulted in a narrowing of the primary school
curriculum with a noticeable increase in the time spent on core subjects
(McNess, Triggs, Broadfoot, Osborn & Pollard, 2001). It has also
resulted in a noticeable increase in primary school exclusions, and an
increased turnover in primary school teachers as a result of "overwork,
linked to the pressure to meet targets, along with relatively low pay
for an all-graduate profession \[and\] . . . lack of control over
curriculum and teaching methods" (Torrance, 2002, p. 10).

Similar findings have been reported by American researchers (e.g., Linn,
2000). Conclusions regarding the adverse effects of high stakes testing
have been strengthened by a review of 49 qualitative studies of the
effects of such testing (Au, 2007). The most commonly reported effects
were a narrowing of curricular content to those subjects included in the
tests and the move by teachers to more lecture-based, teacher-centered
teaching procedures. Given the research to date it is clear that the
introduction of so-called accountability systems does not result in the
introduction of evidence-based practice but rather results in extensive
coaching for the tests, a narrowing of the curriculum, and increased
teacher turnover.

**Motivating change with well designed and effective instructional
materials and activities**

Clearly there cannot be a move to evidence-based teaching if that move
involves overworked classroom teachers in even more work than is
currently the case. Rather than trying to design an incentive which
involves additional pay for additional work on the part of large numbers
of teachers, we need to think in terms of an incentive in which the
reward is *less work*, not more work, for most teachers.

The simplest way of making teaching practice *less* difficult and *less*
effortful for those teachers who adopt evidence-based practices is to
develop field-tested and demonstrably effective teaching materials and
lesson activities for a significant proportion of important curriculum
objectives and to make these readily available to classroom teachers.
This is entirely feasible because we are already doing this for a
limited number of curriculum areas such as reading and science. The only
difference is that the materials which are currently being developed for
teachers have never been evaluated and their effectiveness is unknown.

The provision of teaching materials of known effectiveness to large
numbers of teachers has three advantages.

First, teachers tend to adopt with a certain degree of enthusiasm any
kind of instructional materials which simplify the classroom teaching
task. The availability of an instructional programme or instructional
materials of known effectiveness is likely, therefore, to result in its
adoption by large numbers of teachers.

Secondly, with materials development the teaching package can be
trialled and revised until it meets an agreed standard of effectiveness
-- as was done with the Headsprout reading programme (Twyman, Layng,
Stikeleather & Hobbins, 2005). Not only does this kind of scientific
curriculum development result in increased levels of achievement for all
students in the target group, it also greatly reduces the implementation
time and greatly reduces the professional development costs of
introducing the new practice into all schools.

Thirdly, it is possible to develop field tested teaching materials which
not only teach new skills and understanding to students but which also
teach new skills and understandings to teachers. Davis and Krajcik
(2005) refer to teaching resources of this type as *educative curriculum
materials* and have outlined some of the important characteristics of
such materials.

The cost of developing a sets of instructional materials which are
effective in bringing about a particular learning outcome in most
students and making these freely available to all schools is a
relatively inexpensive change management procedure -- far less expensive
than trying to bring about the same level of change through some kind of
nationwide professional development programme. One of the aims in Book 6
of this website will be to identify teaching programmes which have been
developed, field tested, revised and evaluated to a degree which allows
us to predict their effectiveness in bringing about particular learning
outcomes in particular groups of students.

The major impediment to this solution is that there are very few people
world wide who have advanced training in the scientific design and
scientific evaluation of effective teaching programmes and even fewer
with qualifications and experience in designing educative curriculum
materials. Filling this gap will require the Ministry of Education to
buy in the necessary expertise and to invest in the necessary
infrastructure. One of the ways of accomplishing this -- by recruiting
and training teacher educators to engage in materials development
research and evaluation -- is described below.


#### References

-   Alberta Teachers' Association. (nd). Alberta teachers: A workload
    study. Retrieved 29 May, 2007 from
    http://teachers.ab.ca/Quick+Links/Publications/Other+Publications/Alberta+Teachers+A+Workload+Study
-   Au, W. (2007). High stakes testing and curricular control: A
    qualitative metasynthesis. Educational Researcher, 3, 258-267.
-   Brophy, J. E. (1983). If only it were true: A response to Greer.
    Educational Researcher, 12(1), 10-12.
-   Church, R. J. (2004). Critical teaching variables which govern rate
    of learning. Course reader: Introduction to interventions.
    Christchurch, New Zealand: University of Canterbury, School of
    Education.
-   Davis, E. A., & Krajcik, J. S. (2005). Designing educative
    curriculum materials to promote teacher learning. Educational
    Researcher, 34(3), 3-14.
-   Hanushek, E. A. (1999). Some findings from an independent
    investigation of the Tennessee STAR Experiment and from other
    investigations of class size effects. Educational Evaluation and
    Policy Analysis, 21, 143-163.
-   Hattie, J. (2005), The paradox of reducing class size and improving
    learning outcomes. International Journal of Educational Research,
    43, 387-425.
-   Labaree, D. F. (2004). The trouble with ed schools. New Haven: Yale
    University Press.
-   Linn, R. (2000). Assessments and accountability. Educational
    Researcher, 29, 4-16.
-   Livingstone, I. D. (1994). The workloads of primary school teachers:
    A Wellington region survey. Wellington, N.Z.: Chartwell Consultants.
-   Malouf, D. B., & Schiller, E. P. (1995). Practice and research in
    special education. Exceptional Children, 61, 414-424.
-   McNess, E., Triggs, P., Broadfoot, P., Osborn, M. & Pollard, A.
    (2001). The changing nature of assessment in English primary
    classrooms. Education, 29(3), 9-16
-   Michelson, W. & Harvey, A. S. (2000). Is teachers' work never done?:
    Time-use and subjective outcomes. Radical Pedagogy, 2. Retrieved 10
    April, 2005 from
    http://radicalpedagogy.icaap.org/content/issue2_1/02Michelson.html.
-   Torrance, H. (2002) Can testing really raise educational standards?
    Professorial lecture delivered to the University of Sussex.
    Retrieved 3 July, 2007 from
    www.esri.mmu.ac.uk/respapers/papers-pdf/Professorial%20Lecture.pdf
-   Torrance, H. (1997). Assessment, accountability and standards: Using
    assessment to control the reform of schooling. In A. H. Halsey et
    al. (Eds.), Education: Culture, economy and society. Oxford: Oxford
    University Press.
-   Twyman, J. S., Layng, T. V. J., Stikeleather, G., & Hobbins, K. A.
    (2005). A nonlinear approach to curriculum design: The role of
    behavior analysis in building an effective reading program. In W. L.
    Heward, T. E. Heron, N. A. Neef, S. M. Peterson, D. M. Sainato, G.
    Cartledge et al. (Eds.), Focus on behavior analysis in education:
    Achievements, challenges and opportunities (pp. 55-68). Upper Saddle
    River, NJ: Pearson Education.
-   Wößmann, L. & West, M. (2006). Class-size effects in school systems
    around the world: Evidence from between-grade variation in TIMSS.
    European Economic Review, 50, 695-736.
