---
has_children: false
layout: default
nav_order: 4
title: 'The degree of diversity amongst the children in the class '
---
# The degree of diversity amongst the children in the class 


::: documentByline
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
:::

::: {#parent-fieldname-text-347ca5f7ce5042b3a245e60606d99b1c}
At any age level, an unstreamed class (untracked class) of 25 to 30
students contains students with a diverse range of learning histories,
prior knowledge, prior level of mastery of basic academic skills such as
reading, and prior mastery of basic metacognitive skills such as
self-management. This diversity tends to increase as the decile level
falls because, as the decile level falls, schools draw children from
families with increasingly diverse levels of parental education.

As the learning histories of the children in a classroom become
increasingly diverse, the teaching task becomes increasingly complex.
This is because, as the students become increasingly diverse, the
maintenance of average rates of student progress requires increasing
amounts of individualisation with respect to the selection of teaching
aims and procedures, with respect to the selection and supervision of
learning and practice activities, and with respect to progress
monitoring and the provision of remedial instruction.

The level of diversity exhibited by a class of students at any given age
level has never been adequately defined and procedures for measuring
level of diversity have yet to be devised. However, relatively simple
and accurate measures of level of diversity are easy to envisage.

*Reading age range.* For example, it is possible to specify the degree
of diversity of the students in a classroom by specifying the range of
achievement levels in a basic academic skill such as reading. A year 4
classroom in which reading achievement levels vary from a reading age of
5 years to a reading age of 12 years is a more diverse collection of
students than a year 4 classroom in which reading ages vary from 7 to 10
years. Achieving an effective reading programme in the first class will
be much more difficult than in the second class because the more diverse
class will need to operate many more reading groups, will need a much
greater range of instructional reading materials, and will require
greater amounts of time in one-to-one instruction than the less diverse
class.
:::
