---
has_children: true
layout: default
nav_order: 2
title: 'What are the main issues in observing and recording learning? '
---
# What are the main issues in observing and recording learning? 


::: documentByline
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
:::

::: {#parent-fieldname-text-ed918e9119764367851b06d61e8525a1}
Research involves the systematic, controlled observation of the subject
matter which is of interest. In the case of research into learning and
teaching, this is systematic observation of examples of teaching and/or
learning. "Measurement is the hallmark of any science. It is the
activity that permits scientists to quantify their observations in a
systematic manner and, in so doing, distinguish their endeavour from
philosophy" (Mace & Kratochwill, 1986, p. 154).

The results of a set of systematic observations are most commonly
referred to as *data*. Different ways of looking generate different
kinds of data. That is, different kinds of observation procedures
generate different kinds of observational results. Watching the learner
produces *direct observation data*. Testing the learner produces data in
the form of a test *score*. Rating the learner produces data in the form
of a *numerical rating* (e.g. from 1 to 5). Interviewing the learner
produces data in the form of *interview responses*.

The particular kind of observation procedure which is selected for use
is a matter of some importance. All researchers seek to collect data
which will be accepted as *believable* by the readers of the research
report. But some kinds of data are more believable than others. In this
section we distinguish between indirect and direct observations,
repeated and one-shot measures, qualitative and quantitative data,
idemnotic and vaganotic measures of change, and non-aggregated and
aggregated data.
:::

::: referencesList
#### References

-   Mace, F. C., & Kratochwill, T. R. (1986). The individual subject in
    behavior analysis research. In J. Valsiner (Ed.), The individual
    subject and scientific psychology (pp. 153-179). New York: Plenum
    Press.
:::
