---
has_children: false
layout: default
nav_order: 3
title: 'Behaviour prompts '
---
# Behaviour prompts 


::: documentByline
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
:::

::: {#parent-fieldname-text-70364cf84ff741f3a40dfe0dbe4e4cc1}
Behaviour prompts are prompts which show or tell the learner how to
perform a new behaviour, skill, or sequence of responses. A teacher who
models a forehand tennis stroke to a novice tennis player is using a
behaviour prompt as is the teacher who shows a learner the steps to be
performed in completing a long multiplication problem*. A behaviour
prompt is a prompt which points forward to the behaviour to be performed
by the learner*. Behaviour prompts can take a variety of forms: physical
guidance, models, instructions, and so on.

Being able to distinguish between the different kinds of behaviour
prompts is a useful skill because some kinds of prompts are more
effective at certain developmental levels than others. For example, the
effectiveness of a verbal instruction depends upon the learner\'s
ability (and motivation) to follow the instruction. Verbal instructions
cannot be used to prompt the performance of new behaviours in pre-verbal
learners, or in learners who have not yet learned to comply with the
instructions of other people, or with learners who do not understand the
instruction.

**Physical guidance.** One way of prompting an improved response from
the learner is to physically guide the learner through the actions which
are involved in performing the target skill. The coach who guides the
novice player\'s arm and racquet through a forehand tennis stroke is
using this kind of prompt.

**Modelling (demonstrating)**. The most common prompting procedure is
demonstrating the response for the learner. Demonstrations are often
referred to as *models*. The act of providing a demonstration is called
*modelling* the desired behaviour. In everyday language we talk about
*showing* the learner what to do. Note that much early language learning
occurs when the child imitates the language modelled by other, older
persons during conversations with the child.

Demonstrations are normally presented "live" by the teacher but they can
be presented in other ways. For example, they may take the form of a
*permanent model* -- a diagram of a worked example which the learner can
refer to whenever they need to. Models can be of two general kinds:
process models and product models.

-   A *process model* is one where the teacher demonstrates the process,
    that is, the action which needs to be performed, or the steps which
    need to be performed, in order to produce a particular product or
    outcome. A teacher who shows a learner how to operate, say, a fax
    machine (while the learner watches) is providing a process model.
-   A *product model* is one which shows the final product. The teacher
    who displays each of the printed letters on the wall of the
    classroom for the children to copy is providing a product model as
    is the woodwork teacher who displays an example of the finished
    product for the students to emulate.

**Instructing**. Instructions are verbal descriptions of the behaviour
to be performed. They are statements which describe to the learner when
to perform a particular response or how to perform a particular response
or sequence of responses. In everyday language we talk about *telling*
the learner *how* to perform a particular skill. Instructions may be
presented orally by the teacher, or they may be written down to form a
set of written instructions. The instruction manuals which come with
most modern appliances, and which describe how to operate the appliance,
are good examples of written prompts.

**Mechanical prompts**. Some prompts consist of a mechanical or
electronic device. The training wheels on a young child\'s bicycle
constitute a mechanical balancing prompt. The use of a metronome to
model the correct tempo during practice on a musical instrument is an
example of a mechanical timing prompt. The use of a spelling checker to
prompt the correct spelling of each word during compositional writing
practice on a word processor is an example of a mechanical (electronic)
spelling prompt.

**Combination procedures.** Often the initial performance of a new
procedure is prompted using a mixture of both demonstrations and
instructions. Teaching a student how to perform the procedure for adding
fractions, for example, would usually be achieved by both describing and
demonstrating each of the steps in the procedure.
:::
