# How completely new behaviours and skills are acquired \n

::: documentByline
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
:::

::: {#parent-fieldname-text-2169eea191dd4f54aa8c6822fcfc13ff}
Much learning involves learning how to perform new responses, behaviours
and actions, that is, ones which cannot currently be performed. In this
account we are referring to this type of learning outcome as the
acquisition of new behaviours.

The critical defining characteristic of this kind of learning outcome is
that the new skills cannot be acquired simply by imitation. Practice
(often considerable practice) is also required. Practice is required in
order to develop the sensory-motor coordination which is characteristic
of competent performance. Included under the heading *acquisition of new
behaviours* is the acquisition of all large motor skills (such as ball
handling skills), all fine motor skills (such as handwriting) and early
speech development (which involves learning to coordinate the movement
of the lips, mouth, tongue, larynx and lungs).

Descriptive studies of the development of pronunciation skills, eye-hand
co-ordination skills, and large motor skills provide strong support for
the view that completely new behaviours and skills are acquired by a
process of successive approximations. Central to the process of
successive approximation is the process of induction. These processes
are described by Baldwin and Baldwin (1986) as follows.

How are new responses created in an individual's repertoire? . . .
Variability is a natural part of human behavior. Each time we greet a
friend or say our names, there are usually variations in pitch,
loudness, tone of voice, inflections and other subtleties. We rarely
repeat any behavior in exactly the same way on two different occasions.
Whenever people's behavior is variable and some of these variations lead
to reinforcement but others do not, the behavior is under differential
reinforcement. As you would expect, the reinforced variations become
more frequent while the nonreinforced or punished variations become less
frequent. When a young child is first given a spoon while eating, the
child may stick the spoon into the apple sauce in any of a variety of
different ways. If the spoon is upside down, it fails to pick up much
apple sauce and fails to produce much reinforcement. If the spoon is
right side up, the child may succeed in loading it with a mouthful of
apple sauce (Baldwin & Baldwin, 1986, p. 148-9).

There are processes that often accompany differential reinforcement that
result in the creation of new behaviour. These creative processes are
*induction* and *shaping*, both of which allow us to develop new
behavior patterns that lie beyond old response classes. When an operant
is reinforced and increases in frequency, similar responses may also
appear and increase in frequency even though they have not been
reinforced. This process is called induction to indicate that
reinforcement has induced changes in behaviors that are similar to those
that were reinforced (Baldwin & Baldwin, 1986, p. 156).

Baldwin and Baldwin give the example of someone who is acquiring
increasingly competent high jumping skills.

When a person first learns to high jump, there is usually a broad range
of variation in the height of the early jumps. Some may be only 5 feet,
the majority may be 5.5 feet, and the highest may be 6 feet . . . When
differential reinforcement is initiated, reinforcement may be given for
all jumps of 5.5 to 6 feet, but not for other heights. The person soon
learns to produce more of the higher jumps and fewer shorter jumps. The
high jumper may be learning many skills for approaching the crossbar
from the best angle, selecting the correct spot for jumping, tensing the
muscles more, thrusting harder with the takeoff leg, turning more
smoothly in midair to avoid hitting the bar, and so forth. All these
skills are reinforced when they result in higher jumps; and eventually
the average jump increases from 5.5 to 5.75 feet . . . As these skills
are mastered, the person may actually be able to produce jumps higher
than the original 6-foot maximum jump. New behavior has been created via
induction. This new behavior . . . appears as a natural consequence of
learning the skills for higher jumping, even if no jumps above 6 feet
are ever reinforced. Typically, newly induced behaviour *is* reinforced.
A coach who is reinforcing 6-foot jumps is very likely to give even more
reinforcement for jumps higher than 6 feet (Baldwin and Baldwin, 1986,
p. 156-7).

Notice that differential reinforcement, whether provided by the natural
environment or by a coach can function to shape many different
dimensions of performance. Differential reinforcement can function to
shape accurate pronunciation, more skilful performance (as in the high
jumping example above), more forceful responding (as in learning to kick
or throw a ball further), faster responding, and so on.

In order for a completely new response or behaviour to be acquired by
the learner, three essential conditions must be present. The learner
must have models of competent performance which he or she can emulate,
the learner must have the opportunity to practice the new behaviour, and
improvements in performance must be differentially reinforced either by
the natural environment or else by another person.
:::

::: referencesList
#### References

-   Baldwin, J. D. & Baldwin, J. I. (1986). Behavior principles in
    everyday life (2nd ed.). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
:::
