---
has_children: false
layout: default
nav_order: 3
title: 'Biological reinforcers '
---
# Biological reinforcers 


::: documentByline
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
:::

::: {#parent-fieldname-text-de43be3964d8472fbf1093520f5cdf55}
The biological reinforcers are those environmental events which are
essential to the survival and comfort of individuals as human beings.
The biological reinforcers include such things as food (after a period
without food), water (after a period without water), sugar, oxygen,
sexual stimulation (after a period without sexual stimulation),
continued warmth, rest (after exertion), sleep (after a period without
sleep) and continued sensory stimulation. Events such as these have
probably acquired their reinforcing properties during the evolutionary
history of the human species. The biological reinforcers function as
reinforcers for all members of the human species regardless of culture.
And they function as reinforcers from the earliest age. No learning is
required to turn these events into reinforcers.

Some responses immediately produce reinforcing (or punishing) outcomes
without any other person doing anything - the reinforcing (or punishing)
outcome arises directly as a result of the response. For example, if I
am hungry and prepare something to eat, the behaviour "preparing
something to eat" will be automatically reinforced by the taste (and the
reduction in hunger pangs) which results from eating what I have
prepared. If I read an interesting story, my behaviour (reading) is
automatically reinforced by the sensory stimulation provided by the
reading. If I am cold and turn on the heater the behaviour (turning on
the heater) will be automatically reinforced by the warmth which the
heater produces.

Of the biological reinforcers, sensory stimulation is the most important
as far as school learning is concerned. This is because there are many
things which teachers can do to maintain optimal levels of sensory
stimulation in the classroom. Teachers can also use activity change (and
the resultant increase in sensory stimulation) to reinforce attention,
effort, task completion, and improvement on the part of individual
students.
:::
