# Calls for change \n

::: {#parent-fieldname-text .plain}
Â 

One does not have to look far to find suggestions that we could and
should be developing and implementing more effective teaching practices.
Numerous observers, teaching researchers, and politicians have begun to
call for a radically different approach to the development and
improvement of classroom practice.

Some have called for an end to what they refer to as "faddism" in
education. By faddism they mean the continual recycling of teaching
practices (such as "sensory integration") which have never been shown to
produce any of the benefits claimed for them.

Some have called for increased accountability on the part of teachers.
By accountability they mean the regular testing of children and the move
to hold teachers accountable for ensuring that every student reaches
certain "standards" with respect to selected academic skills.

Some have called for a move to evidence-based practice. By
evidence-based practice they mean the replacement of teaching procedures
of unknown effectiveness with procedures which have been shown, by
controlled research, to be effective for all students.
:::

[ ![Section](../../../../++resource++section_icon.gif){width="16"
height="16"} [Calls for an end to
faddism](Callsforanendtofaddism){.contenttype-section .state-published
.url} ]{.summary} [ ]{.documentByLine}

[ ![Section](../../../../++resource++section_icon.gif){width="16"
height="16"} [Calls for increased
accountability](Callsforincreasedaccountability){.contenttype-section
.state-published .url} ]{.summary} [ ]{.documentByLine}

[ ![Section](../../../../++resource++section_icon.gif){width="16"
height="16"} [Calls for a move to evidence-based
practice](Callsforamovetoevidence-basedpractice){.contenttype-section
.state-published .url} ]{.summary} [ ]{.documentByLine}
