---
grand_parent: 'Important learning and teaching events '
great_grand_parent: '''Welcome to Teacher Education''''s Core Knowledge and Skills.'''
has_children: false
layout: default
nav_order: 2
parent: 'Learning processes, learning outcomes and phases of learning '
title: 'Three important learning processes '
---
# Three important learning processes


```yaml
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
```


The main problem with the word learning is that it does not refer to
just a single process. "Learning" is a collective noun which refers to a
number of different processes.

A child who is learning to read may improve in the sense that they
acquire the ability to recognise words which they couldn't previously
recognise, or they may improve in the sense that they become more
motivated to read and hence read more often than previously, or they may
improve in the sense that they begin to like reading more than they did
previously. In other words, the phrase "learning to read" subsumes a
number of different change processes: the acquisition of new
competencies (the development of new abilities), changes in motivation,
and changes in attitudes, likes, and dislikes.

The ability to distinguish between acquisition, motivation, and
developing a like or dislike is extremely important because these
different types of outcomes occur as a result of different processes and
the different processes require the presence of different kinds of
experiences if they are to occur. For example, demonstrations play an
important role during acquisition but have little or no effect on the
development of a liking for, or motivation. The ratio of reinforcement
to response effort is a primary determinant of motivation but has little
effect on acquisition or liking for. The ratio of success to failure has
a major effect on liking for but has a much smaller effect on
acquisition and motivation.
