---
has_children: false
layout: default
nav_order: 5
title: 'What is to count as evidence in the move to evidence-based practice? '
---
# What is to count as evidence in the move to evidence-based practice? 


::: documentByline
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
:::

::: {#parent-fieldname-text-f45abb2c4047452a9a356e3f08b368ad}
Teaching research of all types varies widely with respect to quality.
Some investigations have measured learning, some have measured only
achievement and some have measured neither learning nor achievement.
Some results have been replicated and many have not. This means that we
need to be clear about whether the research base for teaching is to
include the results of all empirical investigations or just those which
meet certain quality criteria. If the research base is to be limited to
research which meets certain standards, we will also need to be clear
about just what those standards are.

In answering this question, we will argue that teaching practice is such
an important activity (with such profound long term effects on the
children being taught) that the research base must be limited to
empirical results and empirically derived theoretical propositions in
which we can be reasonably confident. This limits the research base to
the results of investigations which meet conventional standards of
measurement accuracy, internal validity, and generalisability.

Since we are only interested in the research base for learning and
teaching we will argue that this research base should be limited to
investigations which (1) address a question about the conditions
necessary for learning or the effects of teaching on learning, (2)
address a question to which the answer is not yet known, (3) employ a
research procedure which could, if appropriately applied, answer the
question which has been asked, (4) use a measure of learning which
provides an accurate record of the learning which occurred in each of
the individual learners, and (5) demonstrate that the measure of
learning is likely to have produced an accurate measurement result. As a
general (although not universal) rule, the research base should also be
limited to investigations which (6) employ an experimental procedure
which could, if appropriately applied, produce an accurate measure of
the effects of the independent variable on the learning of each of the
learners, (7) demonstrate much the same experimental effect across
several direct replications, (8) describe the research procedures,
research results, and theoretical explanations using terms with agreed
meanings, and (9) interpret the results in a language which is
relatively free of pre-scientific concepts and pre-scientific forms of
explanation.

**1. The research addresses a question about learning and/or teaching**

Far too much so-called teaching research is not actually research about
teaching, it is research about teacher qualifications, teacher
personality, teacher stress, the characteristics of effective teachers,
the characteristics of effective schools, the characteristics of
classroom life, and so on. Much is also practitioner research, that is,
research which describes some kind of professional development activity,
teaching activity or classroom practice garnished with the writer's
views regarding the value of these activities but with no reference to
student learning. These are all interesting research topics. But they
are not studies of the conditions necessary for learning or studies of
the relationship between teaching and learning. So they cannot be
included in a research base for *teaching* practice.

We suggest that the research base for learning and teaching should
consist primarily of research into the external conditions which are
necessary in order for specified kinds of learning to occur in students
with stated learning histories, and research into teaching or coaching
or mentoring or classroom practice, or teaching materials, or teaching
programmes and their effects on the learning of students with stated
learning histories.

**2. The research addresses a question with an unknown answer**

Far too much educational research addresses and re-addresses questions
which we already know the answer to. Consider for example the hundreds
of research studies which have sought to measure the correlation between
intelligence and different types of achievement. These studies
invariably find that student performance on generalised achievement
tests such as IQ tests is correlated with student performance on more
specific achievement tests such as tests of reading. While the first
dozen or so of these studies were probably interesting at the time, the
many hundreds of subsequent studies simply amount to wasted effort.

We suggest that the research base for learning and teaching should
contain only research which has attempted to answer questions for which
the answer is not already known. (This includes research which attempts
to explore the limits of a particular effect.) This means that the
research must address questions which cannot be answered simply by
making a few telephone calls and it must address questions which cannot
be answered by engaging in a literature search designed to identify
reports of previous research into the question of interest.

**3. The research uses a research procedure which could possibly answer
the question**

Far too much educational research employs completely inappropriate
research procedures, that is, research procedures which could never
provide an answer to the question which has been asked. An extremely
common example is the cognitive science or social science researcher who
uses a between-groups design with a single post-treatment measure of
achievement to test an hypothesis about one of the changes which we
refer to as learning. Another extremely common example is the
qualitative researcher who seeks, on the basis of a single ethnographic
study of three or four individuals to make generalisations about "boys",
or "junior high school students", or "low achieving students" in
general. A third example is the repeated use of descriptive and
correlational methods to address questions about the origins or *causes*
of certain levels of motivation, certain kinds of attitudes or certain
types of learning.

We suggest that the research base for learning and teaching should
operate a rule which results in the exclusion of all investigations
which have employed a research method which could not possibly have
answered the question which was asked. This will limit the research base
to those studies employing a research method which, if appropriately
applied, could have answered the question which was asked.

**4. The research measures learning in a way which is known to produce
an accurate result**

Because learning involves a transition (e.g. from not being able to
perform some task to being able to complete that task, or from correct
but slow to correct and fast performance of a task) it is clear that an
adequate measure of learning must be a repeated measure because only
repeated observation allows us to detect the point at which a transition
occurs. In addition, children arrive at learning and teaching
experiments with different levels of prior learning and expertise. This
means that the measure of learning must also be one which charts the
improvement or change in each individual learner. Thirdly, some measures
of learning produce more accurate measurement results than others. We
suggest, therefore that the research base for learning and teaching be
limited to those investigations which have employed a measure of
learning which is likely to have produced an accurate measure of the
change which occurred in each of the learners who took part in the
investigation.

Strict adherence to this rule would, of course, rule out all
investigations which have used only a measure of achievement and all
investigations which have reported only aggregate measures (e.g. means
and standard deviations) of change. It may therefore be necessary to
include some randomised groups evaluations in the research base, at
least for an interim period, that is, at least until those studying a
particular question begin to report the results of their experiments on
the learning of individual learners. It will still be important, even in
these cases, to ensure that accurate measures of learning outcomes have
been employed.

**5. The accuracy of the data on learning is demonstrated**

It is actually quite difficult to obtain accurate measures of
performance change in individual learners. This is because learning
takes time and this requires the expenditure of time, effort and money
on observation (or repeated testing) by the researcher. However, it is
clear from previous research that the accuracy of a measure of any of
the changes which we refer to as learning cannot be taken for granted.
Measurement accuracy must, therefore, always be demonstrated.

Accordingly we suggest that the research base for learning and teaching
should be limited to those investigations in which the researcher
provided some evidence of the degree of reliability of the measurement
procedure used or the degree of accuracy of the measurement result which
was obtained. This includes cases where the measurement instrument is a
standardised test or scale which is known to be reliable, that is, a
test or scale with a test administration manual which includes data on
test reliability.

**6. The research measures the effects of some kind external event using
an experimental method which is known to produce an accurate measure of
treatment effects**

Most research into learning and teaching measures the effect of
something on learning. In the great majority of cases these
investigations use some kind of experimental procedure because it is
almost always possible to devise an experiment to measure the effects of
external events on learning and experiments provide the most unambiguous
measures of the effects of environmental variables and conditions on
learning.

Some experimental designs provide relatively accurate measures of the
effects of a change in teaching conditions on student learning and some
do not. We suggest, therefore, that the research base for learning and
teaching be limited to the results of experimental analyses using
research designs which are known to provide relatively reliable measures
of the effects of external conditions on learning (and other types of
change) in individual students.

Strict adherence to this suggestion would, of course, rule out the
results of all randomised groups evaluations of teaching programmes,
teaching materials, and teaching procedures no matter how well
controlled or how well designed the evaluation. This we cannot afford to
do at the present time because these between groups experiments
collectively make up more than half the knowledge base. It will be
necessary, therefore, at least during an interim period, to allow the
inclusion of randomised between-groups evaluations which meet
conventional standards of measurement reliability, experimental control,
and internal validity. While there is a place, at least initially, for
the results of well-controlled between groups measures of the effects of
teaching variables, such experiments can only contribute to the
knowledge base if the size of the treatment effect is reported. We
suggest therefore, that the randomised groups experiments which are
admitted to the knowledge base for teaching be limited to those in which
the effect size has been calculated using a conventional statistic such
as Cohen's *d*, or those which provide data sufficient to enable
calculation of the effect size for each experimental treatment
(Thompson, 2002).

**7. The accuracy of the data on effects is demonstrated**

The accuracy of measures of experimental effect can never be taken for
granted. This is because the design and administration of an internally
valid experiment is a complex task which can go wrong in many different
ways, and because drawing conclusions from an experiment involves a
complex chain of inferences which is also prone to error. The simplest
way of demonstrating the accuracy of a measure of experimental effect is
to build several direct replications into the investigation. Direct
replication involves repeating the experiment with, for example, several
different learners, or several different learning tasks, or several
different teachers. When the same experiment is undertaken several times
and results in much the same level of change or rate of change in each
case, this provides reasonably compelling evidence that the measure of
effect is probably an accurate measure of effect.

We suggest therefore that the research base for teaching give more
weight to experiments with results which have been replicated than to
experiments with results which have not been replicated. Because most
randomised groups experiments have never been replicated this rule will
tend to give greater weight to within-subject experimental analyses of
learning and teaching than to one-off randomised groups evaluations of
teaching procedures and programmes.

**8. The research procedure and research result are described in terms
with agreed meanings**

There can be no scientific research base in the field of learning and
teaching until such time as teaching researchers and learning
researchers begin to adopt a common set of organising concepts (and
concept definitions) which are referred to using agreed terms. At the
present time this simply is not occurring, and this failure is the
single greatest impediment to the development of a science of learning
and the development of a technology of teaching. Such a development is
not impossible. Behaviour analysts have demonstrated that it is possible
to develop a coherent set of concepts by defining learning and teaching
events in terms of their observed functions instead of their structural
characteristics and that it is possible for a group of researchers to
reach agreement on concepts, terms, theoretical principles, and rules
for admitting new concepts in the same way that biological scientists
and medical scientists do.

This demonstration suggests that we should tag investigations in which
the research procedures, research results, and theoretical explanations
have described using terms with agreed meanings. This will enable
reviewers to distinguish between investigations which are part of a
programme of research into a particular question and investigations
which are "one-off' studies of a particular question and to give greater
weight to the former.

**9. The report is relatively free of pre-scientific concepts and forms
of explanation**

There are many aspects of our current thinking about learning and
teaching which constitute major impediments to the development of a
science of learning (and a technology of teaching). Of these, three
currently operate as major barriers to a move towards a scientific
analysis of learning. These are (a) the myth that a science of learning
will be able to be written in everyday language, (b) our continued use
of constructs which have no agreed meanings or operational definitions,
and (c) our inability to distinguish between pre-scientific and
scientific forms of explanation.

None of the established sciences are written in everyday language. All
have had to develop a technical vocabulary in order to make distinctions
between concepts and events which cannot be distinguished using the
terms and concepts of everyday language. While a developing research
base for teaching will inevitably include some investigations which have
been written up in everyday language (because they have generated
interesting results), such reports will need to be marked as destined
for eventual deletion from the research base in order to provide an
incentive for investigators to make the move towards an agreed technical
vocabulary when describing learning and teaching events.

Much of the research on learning to date involves studies of constructs
which have no agreed meaning and no agreed operational definition.
Common examples include such constructs as "intelligence", "long term
memory", "visuo-spatial scratchpad", "achievement motivation",
"automaticity", "phonemic awareness", "lexical awareness",
"understanding", "the construction of meaning", "self-esteem",
"self-efficacy", "depression", "learning disability", "scaffolding",
"discovery learning", and so on, together with all of the variants of
these constructs. Constructs which have no agreed meaning and no agreed
operational definition pose a very serious impediment to the development
of a science of learning because, although these constructs will almost
certainly never be admitted into a mature science of learning, their
continued use hinders emergence of the realisation that these constructs
are essentially useless. Generally speaking, reports of research into
learning and/or teaching which are about constructs which have no agreed
meaning or no agreed operational definition should not be admitted to
the research base for learning and teaching unless there is some
compelling reason for doing do. A compelling reason might be that the
experiment has generated a particularly important or interesting result
and the result is one which can be readily translated into terms which
do have agreed meanings.

Pre-scientific forms of explanation in the research into learning and
teaching are extremely common at the present time. Included under this
heading are all those research reports in which changes in performance,
motivation, attitude or competence are explained using intentional
idioms (e.g. beliefs, desires, attitudes, and so on) and all those
research reports in which changes are explained in terms of the
operation of some unobservable internal disposition (e.g. explaining a
change in productivity in terms of a change in internal motivation, or
explaining an inadequate performance in terms of some kind of
psychopathology, or explaining the acquisition of a new concept in terms
of meaning construction, etc.). Generally speaking reports of research
into learning and/or teaching which employ intentional explanations,
explanations involving reification and other pre-scientific forms of
explanation should not be admitted to the research base for learning and
teaching unless there is some compelling reason for doing do. A
compelling reason might be that the experiment has generated a
particularly important or interesting result and the explanation
provided by the investigator, although pre-scientific, is simply
irrelevant.
:::

::: referencesList
#### References

-   Thompson, B. (2002). What future quantitative social science
    research could look like: Confidence intervals for effect sizes.
    Educational Researcher, 31, 25-32.
:::
