---
has_children: true
layout: default
nav_order: 3
title: 'How fears and anxieties are learned and unlearned '
---
# How fears and anxieties are learned and unlearned 


::: documentByline
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
:::

::: {#parent-fieldname-text-080d191662514d6a92d5d36297c4c556}
Respondent conditioning is also the learning process whereby new fears
and anxieties are acquired -- both those which are realistic and those
which are unrealistic. There are, for each of us, a set of events which
we strive to avoid. These are the events which elicit in us feelings of
anxiety and fear. When these events occur as a consequence of our
actions we refer to them as punishing consequences or aversive
consequences. These aversive events may also occur in respondent
conditioning trials where they are referred to as *unconditioned
aversive events*. Stimulus events which reliably occur in association
with punishment (that is, in association with unconditioned aversive
events) tend to become conditioned eliciting stimuli for an anxiety,
fear, or panic response similar to that elicited by the unconditioned
aversive event.

The following (hypothetical) example of how a young child might come to
fear a teacher (or parent) illustrates this process.

![Figure 4130. Sequence of events involved in a young child acquiring a
fear of a new teacher as a result of experiences with that
teacher.](../../../../../assets/images/Figure4130.png "Figure 4130. Sequence of events involved in a young child acquiring a fear of a new teacher as a result of experiences with that teacher."){.image-inline}

*Figure 4130. Sequence of events involved in a young child acquiring a
fear of a new teacher as a result of experiences with that teacher.*

It is important to remember that emotional reactions such as anxiety and
fear may be functional or they may be dysfunctional. The child who
avoids large and ferocious looking dogs would not be said to have a
"problem". On the contrary, he probably would be commended for his
prudence. There is nothing dysfunctional about an anxiety reaction and
its associated avoidance response to large and ferocious looking dogs.
However, a child who avoided *all* dogs no matter how harmless might be
said to have acquired an unrealistic fear. The same is true in the
classroom. A child who experiences mild anxiety when corrected by a
teacher is experiencing a feeling which almost all children experience.
A child who lives in dread of being corrected by their teacher has a
problem (as does the teacher).

Note that it is not the anxiety which is dysfunctional. Anxiety is a
normal human reaction to dangerous or threatening situations. What is
dysfunctional is the fact that the teacher (in this particular case) has
become a conditioned eliciting stimulus for anxiety, that is, has
acquired the power invariably to trigger anxiety in this particular
child.

Because all teachers, from time to time, come across students who are
overly anxious or fearful in certain classroom situations a knowledge of
how unrealistic fears are acquired (and how that can be unlearned) is
essential knowledge for all classroom teachers. This is because
excessive anxiety can block the performance of highly desirable
behaviours. The child who regularly fails to participate in class may be
failing to participate because the act of speaking in front of others
elicits excessive levels of anxiety. In addition, excessive anxiety can
reinforce and maintain escape and avoidance responses which interfere
with other highly desirable responses. The classic case is the school
phobic child - the child for whom school has become so anxiety provoking
that she simply avoids school altogether.
:::
