---
grand_parent: 'Approaches to research into learning and teaching '
great_grand_parent: 'Types of research evidence '
great_great_grand_parent: 'Teacher Education''s Core Knowledge and Skills.'
has_children: false
layout: default
nav_order: 2
parent: 'Types of explanation '
title: 'Immediate cause explanations and historical explanations '
---
# Immediate cause explanations and historical explanations


```yaml
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
```


Explanations may be framed in terms of immediate causes, that is, in
terms of events immediately preceding the behaviour change which is of
interest, or in terms of historical causes, that is in terms of
experiences which occurred some time ago. Immediate cause explanations
are referred to by biologists as proximate cause explanations (Alessi,
1992). A variety of different kinds of immediate cause explanations are
regularly employed both in everyday discourse and in the discourse of
educational and psychological research. Because these are so common,
they are described separately in the section which follows.

Immediate cause explanations may be given in either a physical
vocabulary or in a non-physical vocabulary. Immediate causes of the
first type refer to immediately prior events which are observable or
which are in principle observable. For example, "a single explanation
was sufficient to show each of the children how to solve the problem."
(Teacher explanations are observable.) Immediate cause explanations of
the second type refer to internal or mental events or structures which
are in principle unobservable. For example, "once the explanation had
been transferred to long term memory, the child was able to solve the
problem." (We cannot observe the transfer of anything to long term
memory.) Immediate cause explanations which refer to unobservable mental
processes or mental structures are commonly referred to as *mentalistic
explanations*.

Explanations may also be framed in terms of historical causes, that is,
by pointing to the past experiences of the learner. This kind of
explanation sometimes occurs in everyday discourse (e.g., "Because the
teacher succeeded in motivating him to prepare for the test, Tim\'s
scores increased from one test to the next"). This kind of explanation
is variously referred to as *historical explanation* (Baum & Heath,
1992), *selectionist explanation* (Palmer & Donahoe, 1992), and ultimate
causation (Alessi, 1992). Historical explanations attempt to address the
question: "What were the conditions which led to the acquisition,
development, or evolution of this particular skill, understanding, or
belief in this particular individual?" They accept, as causes, events
which have occurred well before the behaviour change which is of
interest (events which are distant in time from the change).

Historical explanations may be given in either a physical vocabulary
(e.g., by pointing to past experiences) or they may be given in a
non-physical vocabulary. The link between cigarette smoking and the
(much later) development of lung cancer is an example of an historical
explanation (for lung cancer) given in a physical vocabulary. (A history
of smoking can be observed). "Hand of God" accounts are examples of
historical explanations in a non-physical vocabulary as the following
account illustrates: "Imagine what must be going on in the brain of a
pianist playing a difficult musical composition . . . this incredibly
complex operation . . . is made possible only because musical capability
was pre-programmed into the human brain from birth. . . . Is it not
evident that man\'s intellectual qualities mirror those of a Supreme
Intellect?" (Watchtower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania, 1985).
