# How do behaviour analysts observe and measure learning? \n

::: documentByline
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
:::

::: {#parent-fieldname-text-8c8a4543bfcd443b9899062b1d1fe528}
Behaviour analysis recording procedures are procedures which have been
developed to track the behaviour of individual learners over time. The
observation procedures tend to be direct observation procedures,
observations are usually limited to one or two predefined operant
response classes and observations usually continue over time until a
satisfactory measure of the degree of change has been obtained.
Behaviour analysts routinely distinguish between procedures designed to
*collect* accurate data and procedures designed to *evaluate* the
accuracy of the data which is being collected. (This is one of the major
differences between behaviour analysis research and ethnographic
research.) Behaviour analysts also distinguish between the reliability
of a measurement procedure and the accuracy of a measurement result.

**The focus of individual investigations.** Behaviour analytic
investigations usually focus on a single response class (or a small
number of related response classes). Investigations are usually set up
in such a way as to make possible the recording of individual instances
of the behaviour of interest (such as the oral reading performance of a
particular child) as that behaviour is engaged in with the passage of
time. The aim of individual investigations is usually either (a) to
identify environmental variables (aspects of the learner\'s experience)
which function to produce a certain kind of change in the behaviour of
interest or else (b) to measure the effects of a particular kind of
intervention on the behaviour of interest.

**Sampling procedures.** A behaviour analytic investigation involves
only a small number of learners. Sometimes only a single learner is
studied - although a trend is emerging to include at least two or three
learners in each investigation. These learners are selected purposively.
Once the investigator has decided upon the kind of behaviour change
which is going to be studied, he or she then identifies learners who are
(a) likely to be capable of achieving the learning goal which is of
interest but who (b) have not yet achieved that learning goal. The
behaviour analyst is less concerned with sampling *people* and more
concerned with obtaining an adequate sample of observational sessions or
*occasions* across time.

**Observation procedures**. In order to study changes in behaviour and
ability with the passage of time, behaviour analysts make repeated
observations of the antecedent-action-consequence unit which is of
particular interest. Repeated observations are made because these yield
a more detailed picture of behaviour change than that provided when only
one or two observations are made.

Learning is a continuous process; it can be compared to a motion picture
. . . Assessing a student\'s performance is like taking a single frame
from the motion picture . . . The more instances of measurement we have
to inspect, the more accurate and representative will be our
interpretation of learning. If we can study many frames from the motion
picture, we will have a much better idea of the continuous process the
motion picture represents (West, Young & Spooner, 1990, p. 6).

To measure the effects of environmental variables (such as a change in
teaching procedure) on learning, the behaviour analyst makes repeated
observations, over time, of the behaviour of interest under each
experimental condition. "This practice accommodates the observed fact
that the effects of environmental variables on behavior occur over time.
Obtaining a clear picture of behavior change therefore requires sampling
thoroughly over time" (Johnston & Pennypacker, 1993b, p. 12). The need
to track behaviour changes over time is beginning to be recognised by
researchers who are not behaviour analysts. "Single-subject research
methods enable one to describe the variability predicted by current
theory more precisely than is often possible with either group
experiments or thick descriptions" (Neuman & McCormick, 1995, p. vii).

Behaviour analysts draw a clear distinction between *direct* and
*indirect* measures of human behaviour. Wherever possible, the behaviour
analyst studies the behaviour of interest by observing it directly,
rather than by probing and recording the recollections of participants.
The data of interest are the records of what the participant *actually*
did in a given situation, not what the participant *said* that they did
or what other people *said* that the participant did.

Behaviour analysts tend to limit their use of indirect measures to those
situations where the behaviour of interest cannot be observed directly.
For example, a behaviour analyst would find it acceptable to substitute
a measure of performance outcome (e.g. number of words written) for
direct observations of the performance itself (e.g. writing a story) in
cases where there is likely to be a close correspondence between the
two. A behaviour analyst would also find it acceptable to substitute
verbal reports in cases where the behaviour of interest was previous
attempts to find a job (because the behaviour has already occurred), or
changes in frequency of sexual intercourse (because the behaviour is
extremely personal), or changes in attitude to reading (where the
researcher\'s interest in attitude change is secondary to their interest
in improvements in reading skill).

Where direct observation is not possible because the behaviour of
interest is occurring very infrequently, the behaviour analyst typically
selects a closely related but more frequently occurring behaviour as the
behaviour of interest. For example, if a behaviour analyst was
interested in studying a child\'s antisocial behaviour at school and
hitting was occurring relatively infrequently, antisocial behaviour
might be defined to include a number of other more frequently occurring
antisocial behaviours in addition to hitting. Where direct observation
is not possible because the behaviour is a private behaviour (e.g.
thinking), the behaviour analyst usually substitutes a behaviour which
*is* observable (e.g. thinking out loud).

Behaviour analysts draw a clear distinction between *idemnotic* and
*vaganotic* measures of performance and have a strong preference for
idemnotic measures. A variety of idemnotic measures are used: measures
of latency and duration (time taken), measures of frequency (e.g. number
of requests for help per day), measures of accuracy (e.g. proportion of
words read correctly), measures of fluency (e.g. words correct per
minute), measures of change (e.g. words correct per minute per daily
test), and so on. Idemnotic measures are preferred because the results
of these measures are directly comparable from one occasion to another
within an investigation and from one investigation to the next.

Behaviour analysts also distinguish between different *dimensions* of
behaviour change and select the kind of direct observational procedure
which is best suited to measuring change in the behavioural dimension
which is of interest. For example, a researcher who was interested only
in recording improvements in the ability to solve a particular class of
problems might record this progress in terms of changes in accuracy,
e.g. by counting the number of steps completed correctly on
representative samples of those problems. A researcher who was
interested fluency (automaticity), however, would select a timed test so
that they could record changes in fluency by counting the number of
steps completed correctly per minute.

The recording devices used by behaviour analysts fall into three general
classes: mechanical recording, recording by trained observers, and
participant recording (self-recording). Examples of mechanical recording
include the use of voice operated tape recorders to record the verbal
interactions which are occurring in a particular setting, the use of
video recorders, the use of computers to record the learner\'s responses
to particular classes of problems or exercises, the use of mechanically
operated counters of various kinds, and so on. More commonly, records of
behaviour are made by trained observers. Self-recording tends to be used
only where mechanical recording or recording by trained observers is
impractical.

The recording procedures employed by observers include counting (event
recording), timing (duration recording and latency recording), interval
recording, momentary time-sampling, accuracy testing, fluency testing,
the analysis of behavioural products, measures of response magnitude,
the classification of response topographies, and so on (Church, 1996;
Cooper, Heron & Heward, 1987; Johnston & Pennypacker, 1993a, 1993b).

**Duration of the investigation**. Behaviour analytic investigations
invariably continue for some time. "The dynamic and continuous nature of
behavior must be acknowledged by scheduling periods of observation that
are as long as possible and that occur as frequently as possible"
(Johnston & Pennypacker, 1993b, p. 102).

In an experimental investigation, observations of the behaviour of
interest continue within each phase of the investigation until the
experimenter can determine whether or not performance is changing and,
if it is, the direction and rate of change. "The dynamic nature of
organism-environment interactions through time dictates that measurement
must be scheduled to occur repeatedly over some period of time under
each different set of experimental conditions" (Johnston & Pennypacker,
1993b, p. 103. A minimum of four separate observations or tests is
normally required for this purpose. Experimental investigations
typically contain two to four experimental phases.

The length of the investigation depends upon the way in which the
observations have been scheduled. If observations have been scheduled on
a daily basis, the typical behaviour analysis experiment tends to last
for between two to six weeks. However, investigations spanning a whole
school term, or even an entire school year, have been reported.
:::

::: referencesList
#### References

-   Church, R. J. (1996). Within-subject experimental analysis: A guide
    for students in education. Palmerston North, NZ: New Zealand
    Association for Research in Education.
-   Cooper, J. O., Heron, T. E., & Heward, W. L. (1987). Applied
    behavior analysis. New York: Macmillan Publishing Co.
-   Johnston, J. M., & Pennypacker, H. S. (1993a). Strategies and
    tactics of behavioral research (2nd ed.). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
    Erlbaum Associates.
-   Johnston, J. M., & Pennypacker, H. S. (1993b). Readings for
    strategies and tactics of behavioral research (2nd ed.). Hillsdale,
    NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
-   Neuman, S. B. & McCormick, S. (Eds.). (1995). Single subject
    experimental research: Applications for literacy. Newark, NJ:
    International Reading Association.
-   West, R. P., Young, K. R., & Spooner, F. (1990). Precision teaching:
    An introduction. Teaching Exceptional Children, 22, 4-9.
:::
