# Effects of presentation length \n

::: documentByline
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
:::

::: {#parent-fieldname-text-8642792ff0814ac8bc575c4291c35fcc}
Presentations contain information, information which may or may not be
remembered and recalled by the learner at a later time. Younger children
can \"hold in mind\" only one to three new items of information at one
time (Case, 1978). It follows that the most effective procedure for
presenting new information to young children is one in which small sets
of one to three items of information are immediately followed by the
opportunity to talk about that new information. If more than one to
three items of information are delivered sequentially, the likelihood
that the younger learner will \"forget\" one or more of these rises
dramatically. It can be seen, therefore, that the common practice of
introducing new information within the context of the
\"question-and-answer\" lesson is good teaching practice. Only if the
younger learner has the opportunity to work with new information in some
way, to talk about it, to practise it or to mentally rehearse it, is it
likely to be remembered.

This raises the question of whether it is ever appropriate to present a
large amount of information at one time as during a lecture or a video
presentation on some topic. There is almost no scientific research into
this question and that which has been undertaken has almost exclusively
involved tertiary students (who may be expected to have acquired highly
developed study skills). The classic analysis of lecturing (Bligh, 1972)
reviewed 91 between groups experiments comparing the effects on recall
of lecturing compared to something else and concluded that "the lecture
is as effective as any other method for transmitting information but not
more effective" and "most lectures are not as effective as more active
methods for the promotion of thought" (Bligh, 1972, p. 20). There appear
to have been no recent reviews of lecturing and a 1983 review by Oddi
contains only 15 references.

Given what we know from practical experience, it seem reasonable to
assume that the effects of a lecture will depend to a very large extent
on the information processing and self-instructional skills which have
been acquired by the listener. We would expect a lecture to be followed
by evidence of learning only for those listeners who have acquired the
ability to:

1.distinguish between relevant and irrelevant information,

2.write quickly and take adequate notes which record each important item
of information,

3.review these notes at regular intervals, and

4.use, during these reviews, study strategies which will be effective in
learning and remembering the noted information for future use or
examination performance.

With learners who have not yet acquired all of these study skills,
sequences of presentations should be kept short and should be
interspersed with practice activities which involve talking about,
writing about, or responding to questions about the information
contained in the presentations. We will consider the number of practice
opportunities required in the section on the effects of different
amounts of practice, below.
:::

::: referencesList
#### References

-   Bligh, D. A. (1972). What's the use of lectures? Harmondsworth:
    Penguin Books.
-   Case, R. (1978). A developmentally based theory and technology of
    instruction. Review of Educational Research, 48, 439-463.
-   Oddi, L. (1983). The lecture: An update on research. Adult Education
    Quarterly, 33, 222-229.
:::
