---
layout: default
title: "Conditions which may affect motivation 
"
nav_order: Conditionswhichmayaffectmotivation
has_children: false
---
# Conditions which may affect motivation 


::: documentByline
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
:::

::: {#parent-fieldname-text-a120f69f174c4ecf8299f0bf1cbb8905}
While a minimum level of reinforcement, success, recognition, or reward
is an essential condition for continued motivation, the actual level of
motivation of individual children is also affected by a number of other
variables. A child's motivation to work at a particular type of task or
activity, for example, is affected by the extent to which that activity
has previously generated reinforcement, the schedule of reinforcement
generated, the type of reinforcement generated, the amount of effort
involved in generating reinforcement, the nature of the performance
required in order to generate reinforcement, the ratio of reinforcing to
aversive outcomes generated, and the degree to which the learner is able
to control the activity and the consequences of that activity.

**1. Variations in the prior history of reinforcement generated by an
activity**

Some children have experienced frequent reinforcement for engaging in a
particular class of activities (such as writing) in the past. For such
children, the introduction of additional reinforcement (such as a reward
for writing) has little or no additional effect. This observation has
led some writers to conclude, not that rewards may sometimes have no
effect on motivation, but that they actually undermine motivation (Kohn,
1999). This is often referred to as the "overjustification effect" or as
the "undermining effect". In an extensive review of the scientific
literature, Judy Cameron and David Pierce have shown that the
overjustification effect does not occur and that reinforcing children
who are already highly motivated simply has no effect, not an
undermining effect (Cameron & Pierce, 2002).

What the Cameron and Pierce review does show is that the effects of
reinforcement depend upon the extent to which a particular behaviour or
activity has been reinforced in the past and that it is the students who
are lacking in motivation to complete a particular type of learning task
(such as writing) whose performance is most strongly affected when the
teacher introduces a reinforcement contingency for completing that task
or for completed that task to a particular standard.

**2. Variations in the schedule of reinforcement generated by an
activity**

Desired student behaviours sometimes generate reinforcement for the
student and sometimes do not. The frequency with which a particular
behaviour generates reinforcement is referred to as the schedule of
reinforcement for that behaviour. Experimental research has identified a
number of schedule effects, that is, a number of ways in which
motivation is differentially affected by different schedules of
reinforcement.

*Continuous schedules produce the most rapid changes.* Continuous
schedules are schedules in which each instance of a particular response
results in reinforcement (or punishment). One of the most obvious
effects of introducing a continuous schedule of reinforcement for
improvements in performance is that this results in the most rapid
improvement in performance. If a poorly motivated child suddenly begins
to receive reinforcement for each task completed, task completion
increases rapidly. If every improvement is reinforced, behaviour tends
to improve much more rapidly than if improvements are only reinforced
from time to time. If every misbehaviour is punished, misbehaviours are
suppressed much more rapidly than is the case where misbehaviours are
punished only from time to time (Pfiffner, O'Leary, Rosén & Sanderson,
1985).

However, continuous schedules of reinforcement, although they tend to
produce rapid improvements in performance, also result in performances
which are the least resistant to extinction. If every response has been
reinforced, and for some reason or another reinforcement ceases, then
the person concerned may simply cease using that behaviour. This is
because a change from continuous reinforcement to non-reinforcement is
very obvious when it occurs. If a child has been regularly reinforced in
the past for completing their writing and reinforcement ceases, it is
very obvious to the child that reinforcement has ceased so we would not
be surprised if effort ceased as well.

*Intermittent schedules generate more consistent effort than predictable
schedules.* If a teacher is using a reinforcement contingency to
motivate task completion in the classroom, an intermittent schedule of
reinforcement will usually generate more effort than the same amount of
reinforcement earned on a fixed interval schedule or a fixed ratio
schedule (McLaughlin & Malaby, 1975, 1976; Saudargas, Madsen & Scott,
1977). This is because, once the learner discovers the schedule, it is
possible for them to obtain reinforcement by just completing sufficient
work to meet the requirement, rather than by working consistently.

*Intermittent schedules produce persistence.* Intermittent schedules of
reinforcement also generate performances which are resistant to
extinction. Intermittent schedules produce persistent behaviour -
produce behaviour which is likely to continue even in the face of
non-reinforcement. Another advantage is that it is easier to thin
(gradually withdraw) extrinsic reinforcement on an intermittent schedule
without reducing student motivation (Henderson, Jenson & Erken, 1986).

*When reinforcement becomes too infrequent, effort decreases (and may
even cease altogether)*. With poorly motivated students, the amount of
effort expended tends to be directly related to the frequency with which
that effort is reinforced (Sutherland, Wehby & Copeland, 2000). If the
reinforcement generated by a particular behaviour becomes too
infrequent, the learner may simply cease to engage in that behaviour. If
the learner gets little enjoyment out of reading tasks, they may lose
interest in reading. If the learner ceases to make progress as a result
of practising a particular skill, they may lose interest in practising
that skill. This has a major implication for classroom teaching. It
means that in order to maintain the motivation of children who are not
intrinsically motivated to complete a particular task (who are not
particularly interested in that task), some kind of extrinsic
reinforcement contingency becomes an essential teaching condition if
task engagement is to be maintained.

A major source of reinforcement in the classroom is the positive teacher
reactions which students receive for their efforts. However, many
descriptive studies have found that many classroom teachers use praise
quite infrequently. A study of American first grade teachers found that
the teachers praised only about 11 per cent of correct student answers.
Thomas, Presland, Grant and Glynn (1978) found that N.Z. teachers gave
explicit approval not much more than about 12 times an hour. Rossiter\'s
observations of N.Z. Year 1 and Year 2 teachers revealed that the
teachers who were observed provided positive reactions something less
than 25 times an hour (Rossiter, 1982). However, the same study also
showed that when teachers were trained to accentuate the positive and to
praise even small improvements, they were able to achieve 80 to 90
encouraging remarks per hour. So it is clear that improvements in
typical classroom practice are possible.

One of the ways of increasing teacher attention to and praise for task
engagement is for the teacher to set goals with respect to what will be
praised and how often while a mentor or senior colleague provides the
teacher with performance feedback as to whether this goal is being
achieved from day to day (Martens, Hiralall & Bradley, 1997; Rose, 1994;
Sutherland et al., 2000).

Another way of increasing positive teacher reactions to student
behaviour is to teach the *students* to recruit teacher attention. In a
review of this research, Alber and Heward (2000) report that there have
been at least 10 controlled evaluations of the effects of teaching
students to recruit teacher attention. These studies have included
children in early childhood centres, primary school children with and
without learning disabilities, and adolescents. In all of these studies,
the children quickly learned how to solicit feedback on their work and
in several studies the investigators were able to demonstrate that
soliciting feedback not only resulted in increased teacher praise but
also resulted in increased work completion on the part of the students
(Alber, Heward & Hippler, 1999; Craft, Alber & Heward, 1998).

**3. Variations in the response effort required for success on an
activity**

Motivation depends in part upon task difficulty. For example, very easy
tasks and tasks which lack challenge tend to motivate little effort
(because little effort is required) and may even be experienced as
boring. In cases such as these, simply increasing task difficulty may
result in an improvement in motivation (Umbreit, Lane & Dejud, 2004).

The kinds of tasks which students find most motivating are those which
involve a reasonable challenge. This is probably because of the sense of
achievement which is generated by completing a task which involves a
reasonable challenge.

However, classroom tasks can also be too difficult, and in these cases,
sustaining student motivation requires a procedure in which the amount
of reinforcement which can be earned increases as task difficulty and
the risk of failure increases (e.g., Bucher & Okovita, 1977). Experience
suggests that students will be motivated to select more challenging
tasks in the classroom if they know that the rewards which can be earned
outweigh the risks of failure. \"Students do, in fact, freely choose
more difficult problems (a) when the number of points offered increases
with the difficulty level of problems (b) when the risk-taking task is
presented within a game or practice situation and (c) when additional
opportunities for risk taking are anticipated\" (Clifford, 1990, p. 24).

**4. Variations in the performance dimension on which reinforcement
depends**

The reinforcement which results from sustained effort may occur as a
result of achieving any one of a number of different performance
standards: staying on task, completing tasks, completing tasks to a
particular standard (i.e. responding correctly), responding correctly
and quickly (i.e. responding fluently), showing improvement, and so on.
In technical terms we say that reinforcement may be contingent on any
one of a number of different dimensions of performance.

*Reinforcing on-task behaviour*. One way of defining success is in terms
of the degree of attention to and engagement in learning activities.
Attention to practice stimuli, engagement with learning tasks, and
staying on task until learning activities are completed are essential
prerequisites for learning. Many dozens of classroom experiments have
demonstrated that engagement with learning tasks is extremely sensitive
to positive reinforcement (e.g., Fontenelle & Holliman, 1983; Glynn,
1972; Maag, Rutherford & DiGangi, 1992). However, reinforcing time on
task does not necessarily result in students completing more work or in
improvements in performance (Ferritor, Buckholdt, Hamblin & Smith,
1972).

*Reinforcing task completion.* A second way of defining success is in
terms of the amount of work completed. With these kinds of
contingencies, the student is reinforced for engaging in the learning
activity regardless of the quality of the work which is completed. Where
the consequences which are being earned are reinforcing for the pupil
concerned, this kind of contingency produces rapid and marked increases
in both time on task and work completed (e.g., Fontenelle & Holliman,
1983). Note, however, that because reinforcement is not dependent upon
the accuracy or quality of the work completed this increased
productivity tends not to be accompanied by improvement in the quality
of the work completed (e.g., Ferritor et al., 1972; Hundert, Bucher &
Henderson, 1976; McLaughlin & Malaby, 1975).

*Reinforcing correct responses.* Thirdly, success may be defined in
terms of improvements in accuracy or the proportion of correct
responses. When reinforcement is contingent on responding correctly, the
number of correct responses almost always increases as does task
completion (Marholin & Steinman, 1977; Scriven & Glynn, 1983) and task
engagement (Broughton & Lahey, 1978; Ferritor et al., 1972; Hundert et
al., 1976; Kastelen, Nickel & McLaughlin, 1984; Scriven & Glynn, 1983).
This is because, unless the student attends, concentrates, and works at
producing correct or improved responses, no reinforcement is
forthcoming.

However, reinforcing accurate performance has a down side as well. If
reinforcement is made contingent upon the number of correct responses,
there is no incentive to respond quickly. In fact, the learner may be
motivated to work conscientiously, that is, *slowly* and carefully in an
attempt to maximise the number of correct responses (Eisenberger,
Mitchell, McDermitt & Masterson, 1984). Reinforcing accuracy, in other
words, may work against the development of mastery.

*Reinforcing correct and speedy responses.* In order to master or
"memorise" a new skill or a set of correct responses, practice must
continue until the learner can respond both correctly and *quickly*. So
a fourth way of defining success is in terms of improvements in accurate
and speedy responding, that is fluent responding. When classroom
reinforcers are made contingent upon responding both correctly and
quickly, speed improves and accuracy also continues to improve (e.g.,
Chadwick & Day, 1971). Task engagement also tends to be very high during
timed practices.

*Reinforcing improvements in performance.* Classroom reinforcers may be
made contingent on responding correctly or fluently but they may also be
contingent on *improvements* in accuracy or fluency. By making
reinforcers contingent upon improvements in performance (rather than the
absolute level achieved), all students in the class (regardless of
ability) have an equal opportunity to earn available reinforcers and
hence to experience learning as a positive experience.

Slavin (1991, p. 346-347) suggests that all assessed work in the
classroom should receive two marks, a mark or grade showing the standard
of work achieved and a mark showing the number of \"improvement points\"
which have been earned. Before improvement points can be calculated, the
teacher must collect several samples of work, or test scores, and must
work out the average standard achieved in these. This then becomes the
base score against which improvements will be calculated. Slavin
suggests that work which is as good as the base score should earn one
improvement point, work which is up to 10 per cent better than the base
score should earn two improvement points and work which shows a better
than 10 per cent improvement (together with work which earns a perfect
score) should receive three improvement points. These improvement points
can then be exchanged for specific rewards. This procedure is relatively
easy to operate in the case of work which is done in exercise books but
more difficult to operate in the case of tests and project work. In the
latter cases the teacher must keep a sufficiently accurate record of
achievement on assessed tasks to enable the calculation of improvement
points on new work. This is the procedure which Slavin has used in a
number of studies of the effectiveness of specific co-operative learning
procedures.

Reinforcing improvements has a number of advantages. First, it results
in an accelerated rate of improvement (Barton, 1981, Brigham, Burt &
Edwards, 1976; Swanson, 1981) while at the same time producing increases
in productivity and time on task.

**5. Variations in the type of reinforcement generated by success on an
activity**

The type of reinforcing outcome which is used to motivate increased
effort may take many different forms: free time, access to prized
activities, small rewards such as stickers, snacks, vouchers, tradable
tokens, positive social reactions such as praise, positive feedback, and
so on. Applications of Premack's rule, where a certain level of effort,
productivity or improvement earns a certain amount of time in a
preferred, desired or prized activity have been studied extensively and
have been found to function as reinforcing outcomes for almost all
learners (e.g. Edgar & Clement, 1980; Miller & Schneider, 1970; Witt,
Hannafin & Martens, 1983).

Home rewards, privileges, preferred activities and pocket money have
also been used to good effect (Bailey, Wolf & Phillips, 1970; Drew,
Evans, Bostow & Drash, 1982; McKenzie, Clark, Wolf, Kothera & Benson,
1968). The effect also tends to be very strong because students often
have access to a much wider range of reinforcing leisure activities at
home than they do at school. However, the contingent access must be to
an activity to which access has been restricted so that a deprivation
state exists with respect to that activity (Konarski, Crowell, Johnson &
Whitman, 1982; Konarski, Johnson, Crowell & Whitman, 1980).

Contingent access to desired activities, when used appropriately, tends
to have a much more motivating effect than positive feedback or social
reinforcement (e.g. praise) (e.g., Zanolli, Paden & Cox, 1997). Token
systems in which tokens earn school appropriate rewards also have a more
motivating effect than praise alone (Glynn, 1972).

Extrinsic reinforcement contingencies are usually regarded as a
temporary device to be used until the child experiences success and this
success is sufficient to maintain motivation and effort. Interestingly,
the right to earn one's self off a token reinforcement system is itself
reinforcing and can result in further effort (e.g., Kazdin & Mascitelli,
1980).

**6. Variations in the ratio of reinforcing and aversive consequences
generated by a particular activity**

It is possible for desirable, appropriate, and correct responses to
generate aversive consequences as well as reinforcing consequences. A
child may work hard in class and complete all the set work ahead of time
only to discover that they are given more work to do -- a potentially
aversive consequence for working hard. A child may solve a maths problem
using an unusual procedure and have the solution marked wrong (because
they used the wrong procedure) -- a potentially aversive consequence for
both creativity and producing the correct answer. A child may work hard
at a task which they find very difficult, only to be reprimanded for
failing to complete the task -- a potentially aversive consequence for
working as well as one is able to on an inappropriate task. A child may
work conscientiously in class and be teased or bullied at a later time
for failing to conform to student norms of conduct in the school
setting. The classroom may be too hot, too cold, or poorly lit, or too
noisy.

It follows therefore that the motivation to continue engaging in a
particular kind of classroom activity depends not just on the amount,
type and schedule of reinforcement generated by success on that activity
but on the *net* reinforcement, that is the motivating effects of
reinforcement less the avoidance motivating effects of the aversive
outcomes which also result from engaging in that activity.

**7. Variations in the degree of learner control over learning tasks and
performance goals**

Practical experience suggests that children and adults alike much prefer
to work under conditions in which they have some say regarding the goals
to be pursued and the order in which tasks should be completed. "One
fundamental principle of human motivation is that people work harder for
goals they themselves set than for goals set for them by others"
(Slavin, 1991, p. 342). It is not surprising therefore to find that
there have been a number of experimental studies of the effects of
choice on the motivation of poorly motivated students in the classroom
setting (Kern, Vorndran, Hilt, Ringdahl, Adelman & Dunlap, 1998).

There have been number of experimental demonstrations of the effects of
giving students choice over the learning activities to be completed.
Cosden, Gannon and Haring (1995) found that two misbehaving upper
primary school students completed more work when allowed to choose
learning tasks from a list generated by the teacher. Dunlap, DePerzcel,
Clark, Wilson, Wright and Gomez (1994) report that two misbehaving
primary school boys spent more time on task when given the opportunity
to choose spelling and language assignments from half a dozen options
than when given an assignment by the teacher. Seabaugh and Schumaker
(1994) found that when six low achieving secondary school students were
given choices in the way in which they organised their school work (as
part of a training package in self-regulation) they accomplished much
more than they had previously. The same effect has been observed for
children with intellectual disabilities (Umbriet & Blair, 1996) and
children with autism (Moes, 1998).

It seems likely that the choice effect occurs only under certain
conditions. For example, it appears only to occur on less preferred, and
not on preferred learning tasks (Killu & Clare, 1999; Killu, Clare & Im,
1999). Furthermore, the effect on motivation arises primarily as a
result of being permitted to work on tasks which are liked (preferred
tasks) rather than from the act of being permitted to choose (Cole,
Davenport, Bambara & Ager, 1997; Killu, Clare et al., 1999).

This suggests that the apparently motivating effects of choice are due
to the fact that when students are free to choose, they are able to
choose the most reinforcing activity from amongst those which are
available at that time. In addition, when students are free to choose,
they are able to avoid or to postpone less reinforcing activities in
favour of more reinforcing activities. It is also the case that where
the teacher controls the scheduling of activities, the end of a period
means that work on the current activity must stop regardless of how
interesting it has become to the student. When the learner has some
control over scheduling, he or she may continue to work on an
interesting task until it is finished and can avoid having to stop work
on an interesting activity in the middle of that activity. Having to
stop work in the middle of an interesting activity is experienced as
aversive by most people.

Giving the learner some control over the learning tasks to be completed
is usually believed to be important in the development of
self-management skills and independence and it certainly provides
practice in these skills. However, there will be many situations where
it is impractical to provide poorly motivated students with a choice of
activities. "There are some academic assignments that students should
not be allowed to avoid (e.g., avoid engaging in narrative writing
assignments by choosing to do grammar worksheets)" (Skinner, Wallace &
Neddenriep, 2002, p. 54). Giving choices may also result in the poorly
motivated student consistently choosing easier and less valuable
learning tasks over more challenging tasks with greater instructional
value.

Just as learners may be given responsibility for the order in which
learning tasks are scheduled, so they may be given varying levels of
responsibility for choosing the rewards which they will enjoy for
meeting selected learning goals. Provided the system is monitored,
student selected reinforcers can be just as motivating as teacher
selected reinforcers (Cosden et al., 1995) and sometimes more so (Edgar
& Clement, 1980). However the effects are variable with some studies
showing self evaluation and self-reinforcement to have little or no
effect on time on task (Glynn & Thomas, 1974) and others showing that
the introduction of self-reinforcement can result in inflated
self-evaluation scores (Speidel & Tharp, 1980).

Competitions of various kinds are often used by teachers to motivate
greater effort on less interesting learning tasks. However, competition
can have serious negative effects on motivation. This is because, in a
competition, there is always a loser as well as a winner and students
who consistently end up as the losers in classroom competitions quickly
lose interest in competing. Competitive classroom arrangements "can be
criticised for discouraging students from helping one another learn, for
tending to set up a 'pecking order' in the classroom and for
establishing a situation in which low achievers have little chance of
success" (Slavin, 1991, p. 353). The detrimental effects of classroom
competition have been widely recognised.

"Eccles et al. (1984) reviewed a number of studies that examined the
effect of grading practices, competitive vs. cooperative goal
structures, and ability grouping. They concluded that traditional,
external, ability based evaluation and grading increased students\'
focus on how they compared to their peers and depressed student
motivation, compared to alternative procedures that involved student
self-evaluation or evaluation against student-controlled objectives.
Competitive goal structures in which one student\'s success is earned at
the cost of another's failure were found to produce lower motivation to
learn, less favourable attitudes toward school teachers and other
students, and lower self-esteem than cooperative goal structures in
which success is a shared outcome" (Goetz, Alexander, & Ash, 1992, p.
562-563).

If competition is to be used as a motivational device, without damaging
attitudes and self-esteem, then it must be structured in such a way that
all competitors have an equal chance of winning. That is, it must be
limited to group activities where the groups are evenly matched and have
an equal chance of success. Slavin (1991, p. 342) makes the point that
team games are better than individual games because they provide
opportunities for team-mates to help one another and avoid the situation
where the more able students always win. The use of mixed ability teams
means that teams are more evenly matched so that all have an equal
chance of winning.
:::

::: referencesList
#### References

-   Alber, S. R. & Heward, W. L. (2000). Teaching students to recruit
    positive attention: A review and recommendations. Journal of
    Behavioral Education, 10, 177-204.
-   Alber, S. R., Heward, W. L., & Hippler, B. J. (1999). Teaching
    middle school students with learning disabilities to recruit
    positive teacher attention. Exceptional Children, 65, 253-270.
-   Bailey, J. S., Wolf, M. M., & Phillips, E. L. (1970). Home-based
    reinforcement and the modification of pre-delinquents' classroom
    behavior. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 3, 223-233.
-   Barton, E. J. (1981). Developing sharing: An analysis of modeling
    and other behavioral techniques. Behavior Modification, 5, 386-398.
-   Brigham, T. A., Burt, D., & Edwards, R. (1976). An application of
    operant principles to instruction. Educational Technology, 16,
    45-48.
-   Broughton, S. F., & Lahey, B. B. (1978). Direct and collateral
    effects of positive reinforcement, response cost, and mixed
    contingencies for academic performance. Journal of School
    Psychology, 16, 126-136.
-   Bucher, B., & Okovita, H. (1977). Effects of differential
    reinforcement and task difficulty on preschoolers' compliance with
    teacher instructions. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 23,
    226-236.
-   Cameron, J., & Pierce, W. D. (2002). Rewards and intrinsic
    motivation: Resolving the controversy. Westport, CT: Bergin &
    Garvey.
-   Chadwick, B. A., & Day, R. C. (1971). Systematic reinforcement:
    Academic performance of underachieving students. Journal of Applied
    Behavior Analysis, 4, 311-319.
-   Clifford, M. M. (1990). Students need challenge, not easy success.
    Educational Leadership, 48(1), 22-26.
-   Cole, C. L., Davenport, T. A., Bambara, L. M., Ager, C. L. (1997).
    Effects of choice and task preference on the work performance of
    students with behavior problems. Behavioral Disorders, 22, 65-74.
-   Cosden, M., Gannon, C., & Haring, T. G. (1995). Teacher-control
    versus student-control over choice of task and reinforcement for
    students with severe behavior problems. Journal of Behavioral
    Education, 5, 11-27.
-   Craft, M. A., Alber, S. R., & Heward, W. L. (1998). Teaching
    elementary students with developmental disabilities to recruit
    teacher attention in a general education classroom: Effects on
    teacher praise and academic productivity. Journal of Applied
    Behavior Analysis, 31, 399-415.
-   Drew, B. M., Evans, J. H., Bostow, G. G., & Drash, P. W. (1982).
    Increasing assignment completion and accuracy using a daily report
    card procedure. Psychology in the Schools, 19, 540-547.
-   Dunlap, G., DePerzcel, M., Clark, S., Wilson, D., Wright, S., &
    Gomez. A. (1994). Choice making to promote adaptive behavior for
    students with emotional and behavioral challenges. Journal of
    Applied Behavior Analysis, 27, 505-518.
-   Eccles, J., Midgley, C. & Adler, T. (1984). Grade-related changes in
    the school environment: Effects on achievement motivation. In J.
    Nicholls (Ed.), Advances in motivation and achievement (Vol 3, pp.
    283-331). Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
-   Edgar, R., & Clement, P. W. (1980). Teacher-controlled and
    self-controlled reinforcement with underachieving black children.
    Child Behavior Therapy, 2, 33-56.
-   Eisenberger, R., Mitchell, M., McDermitt, M., & Masterson, F. A.
    (1984). Accuracy versus speed in the generalized effort of
    learning-disabled children. Journal of the Experimental Analysis of
    Behavior, 42, 19-36.
-   Ferritor, D. E., Buckholdt, D., Hamblin, R. L., & Smith, L. (1972).
    The non-effects of contingent reinforcement for attending behavior
    on work accomplished. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 5, 7-17.
-   Fontenelle, S., & Holliman, W. (1983). Social management techniques
    for classroom teachers. Psychological Reports, 52, 815-818.
-   Glynn, E. L. (1972). Verbal and token reinforcement: Elements of
    behaviour control in a problem class. New Zealand Psychologist, 1,
    13-20.
-   Glynn, E. L., & Thomas, J. D. (1974). Effect of cueing on
    self-control of classroom behavior. Journal of Applied Behavior
    Analysis, 7, 299-306.
-   Goetz, E. T., Alexander, P. A., & Ash, M. J. (1992). Educational
    psychology: A classroom perspective. New York: Macmillan Publishing
    Co.
-   Henderson, H. S., Jenson, W. R., & Erken, N. F. (1986). Using
    variable interval schedules to improve on-task behavior in the
    classroom. Education & Treatment of Children, 9, 250-263.
-   Hundert, J., Bucher, B., & Henderson, M. (1976). Increasing
    appropriate classroom behavior and academic performance by
    reinforcing correct work alone. Psychology in the Schools, 13,
    195-200.
-   Kastelen, L., Nickel, M., & McLaughlin, T. F. (1984). A performance
    feedback system: Generalization of effects across tasks and time
    with eighth-grade English students. Education & Treatment of
    Children, 7, 141-155.
-   Kazdin, A. E., & Mascitelli, S. (1980). The opportunity to earn
    oneself off a token system as a reinforcer for attentive behavior.
    Behavior Therapy, 11, 68-78.
-   Kern, L., Vorndran, C., Hilt, A., Ringdahl, J., Adelman, B., &
    Dunlap, G. (1998). Choice as an intervention to improve behavior: A
    review of the literature. Journal of Behavioral Education, 8,
    151-169.
-   Killu, K., & Clare, C. (1999). Choice vs. preference: The effects of
    choice and no choice of preferred and non preferred spelling tasks
    on the academic behavior of students with disabilities. Journal of
    Behavioral Education, 9, 239-253
-   Killu, K., Clare, C. M., & Im, A. (1999). Choice vs. preference: The
    effects of choice and no choice of preferred and non preferred
    spelling tasks on the academic behaviour of students with
    disabilities. Journal of Behavioral Education, 9, 239-253.
-   Kohn, A. (1999). Punished by rewards: The trouble with gold stars,
    incentive plans, A\'s, praise, and other bribes (New ed.). Boston,
    MA: Mariner Books.
-   Konarski, E. A., Crowell, C. R., Johnson, M. R., & Whitman, T. L.
    (1982). Response deprivation, reinforcement, and instrumental
    academic performance in an EMR classroom. Behavior Therapy, 13,
    94-102.
-   Konarski, E. A., Johnson, M. R., Crowell, C. R., & Whitman, T. L.
    (1980). Response deprivation and reinforcement in applied settings:
    A preliminary analysis. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 13,
    595-609.
-   Maag, J. W., Rutherford, R. B., & DiGangi, S. A. (1992). Effects of
    self-monitoring and contingent reinforcement on on-task behavior and
    academic productivity of learning-disabled students: A social
    validation study. Psychology in the Schools, 29, 157-172.
-   Marholin, D., & Steinman, W. M. (1977). Stimulus control in the
    classroom as a function of the behavior reinforced. Journal of
    Applied Behavior Analysis, 10, 465-478.
-   Martens, B. K., Hiralall, A. S., & Bradley, T. A. (1997). A note to
    teacher: Improving student behavior through goal setting and
    feedback. School Psychology Quarterly, 12, 33-41.
-   McKenzie, H. S., Clark, M., Wolf, M. M., Kothera, R., & Benson, C.
    (1968). Behavior modification of children with learning disabilities
    using grades as tokens and allowances as back up reinforcers.
    Exceptional Children, 34, 745-752.
-   McLaughlin, T. F., & Malaby, J. E. (1975). The effects of various
    token reinforcement contingencies on assignment completion and
    accuracy during variable and fixed token exchange schedules.
    Canadian Journal of Behavioural Science, 7, 411-419.
-   McLaughlin, T. F., & Malaby, J. E. (1976). An analysis of assignment
    completion and accuracy across time under fixed, variable, and
    extended token exchange periods in a classroom token economy.
    Contemporary Educational Psychology, 1, 346-355.
-   Miller, L. K., & Schneider, R. (1970). The use of a token system in
    Project Head Start. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 3,
    213-220.
-   Moes, D. R. (1998). Integrating choice-making opportunities within
    teacher-assigned academic tasks to facilitate the performance of
    children with autism. TASH, 23, 319-328.
-   Pfiffner, L. J., O\'Leary, S. G., Rosén, L. A., & Sanderson, W. C.
    (1985). A comparison of the effects of continuous and intermittent
    response cost and reprimands in the classroom. Journal of Clinical
    Child Psychology, 14, 348-352.
-   Rose, D. J. (1994). The effect of practice on the acquisition and
    maintenance of teaching skills. Unpublished PhD thesis.
    Christchurch, N.Z.: University of Canterbury, Education Department.
-   Rossiter, A. (1982). The difficult to teach junior school pupil:
    Identification and teaching strategies. Research Report No 82-1.
    Christchurch, N.Z.: Education Department, University of Canterbury.
-   Saudargas, R. W., Madsen, C. H., & Scott, J. W. (1977). Differential
    effects of fixed- and variable-time feedback on production rates of
    elementary school children. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis,
    10, 673-678.
-   Scriven, J., & Glynn, T. (1983). Performance feedback on written
    tasks for low-achieving secondary students. New Zealand Journal of
    Educational Studies, 18, 134-145.
-   Seabaugh, G. O., & Schumaker, J. B. (1994). The effects of
    self-regulation training on the academic productivity of secondary
    students with learning problems. Journal of Behavioral Education, 4,
    109-133.
-   Skinner, C. H., Wallace, M. A., & Neddenriep, C. E. (2002). Academic
    remediation: Educational applications of research on assignment
    preference and choice. Child & Family Behavior Therapy, 24, 51-65.
-   Slavin, R.E. (1991). Educational psychology (3rd ed.). Englewood
    Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
-   Speidel, G. E., & Tharp, R. G. (1980). What does self-reinforcement
    reinforce? An empirical analysis of the contingencies in
    self-determined reinforcement. Child Behavior Therapy, 2, 1-22.
-   Sutherland, K. S., Wehby, J. H., & Copeland, S. R. (2000). Effect of
    varying rates of behavior-specific praise on the on-task behavior of
    students with EBD. Journal of Emotional and Behavioral Disorders, 8,
    2-8, 26.
-   Swanson, L. (1981). Modification of comprehension deficits in
    learning disabled children. Learning Disability Quarterly, 4,
    189-202.
-   Thomas, J. D., Presland, I. E., Grant, M. D. & Glynn, T. L. (1978).
    Natural rates of teacher approval and disapproval in Grade 7
    classrooms. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 11, 91-94.
-   Umbriet, J., & Blair, K. (1996). The effects of preference, choice,
    and attention on problem behavior at school. Education and Training
    in Mental Retardation and Developmental Disabilities, 31, 151-161.
-   Umbreit, J., Lane, K. L., & Dejud, C. (2004). Improving classroom
    behavior by modifying task difficulty: Effects of increasing the
    difficulty of too-easy tasks. Journal of Positive Behavior
    Interventions, 6, 13-20.
-   Witt, J. C., Hannafin, M. J., & Martens, B. K. (1983). Home-based
    reinforcement: Behavioral covariation between academic performance
    and inappropriate behavior. Journal of School Psychology, 21,
    337-348.
-   Zanolli, K.M., Paden, P., & Cox, K. (1997). Teaching prosocial
    behavior to typically developing toddlers. Journal of Behavioral
    Education, 7, 373-391.
:::
