# Effects of child initiated and teacher initiated learning interactions \n

::: documentByline
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
:::

::: {#parent-fieldname-text-09a8159c458b46ecb3046e5fad4c52f6}
Learning interactions may be initiated by the learner or by the teacher.
Child-initiated learning interactions are strongly preferred by early
childhood educators and are justified by arguing (a) that it is
important not to teach anything until the child is "ready" and (b) it is
important to allow the child to select and initiate learning activities
so that the teacher can determine when the child is "ready". Early
childhood educators also tend to argue that the use of incidental
teaching in contexts where stimuli are the same as those in typical
environments is much more likely to result in generalisation (e.g.
Warren & Kaiser, 1986).

These claims have been the subject of almost no experimental analysis.

The earliest analysis of child initiated learning is a series of
"incidental teaching" experiments by Hart and Risley (1968, 1974, 1975,
1980). In these studies, which involved 5-year olds in low achieving
urban schools, child-initiated interactions were primed by placing
desired toys and materials on a shelf and requiring any child who wanted
an item from the shelf to request it by name. If the child said nothing,
the teacher prompted an appropriate request. If the child made an
appropriate verbal request, he or she was immediately reinforced by
being given the requested toy or materials. This intervention resulted
in greatly increased use by the children of names (when names were
required), descriptive adjectives (when these were required) and so on.
These studies included no control condition and the child initiated
requests were frequently prompted by the teachers.

Since the Hart and Risley studies there appear to have been four
attempts to measure the relative effectiveness of child initiated versus
teacher initiated learning interactions (Cavallaro & Bambara, 1982;
McGee, Krantz & McClannahan, 1985; Miranda-Linne & Melin, 1992; McLay,
2003). Cavallaro and Bambara (1982) report that incidental teaching
produced a higher rate and variety of two-word utterances in
language-delayed preschool children but the experiment did not control
for the number of practice opportunities in each condition.. McGee et
al. (1985) provided 20 practice opportunities for each condition each
day and found that there was no difference between the rates of
acquisition and retention resulting from the two teaching conditions.
There was, however, somewhat greater generalisation of spontaneous
preposition use to free play settings. Miranda-Linne and Melin (1992)
provided 20 trials each day for each condition and found that teacher
directed, discrete-trial teaching produced faster acquisition and
greater generalisation of the colour adjectives that were being taught.

McLay (2003) compared the rate of learning of seven 4-year old children
under two conditions: a Child's Game in which all learning interactions
were initiated by the child (who had been taught to ask "What is the
name of this animal?") and a Teacher's Game in which all interactions
were initiated by an adult asking "What is the name of this animal?" The
child was free to ask such questions as many times as they liked and in
any order until they either became bored or until 8 minutes had passed.
To control the number of learning opportunities across both teaching
conditions, each experiment began with the Child's Game, the number of
question and answer interactions which occurred during each Child's Game
was recorded, and the number of questions the experimenter asked during
the next Teacher's Game was the same as the number that the child had
asked during the previous, same-numbered Child's Game. The Teacher's
Game also differed from the Child's Game in that the experimenter
targeted only four animals at a time and asked questions repeatedly
about these animals until their names had been learned. It was found
that acquisition, maintenance and generalisation were closely similar
across the two conditions for almost all of the children.

The McLay results are consistent with those of McGee et al. (1985) who
found no significant difference in rates of acquisition or retention
when comparing an incidental teaching condition against a discrete-trial
teaching condition with the number of learning opportunities controlled.
Like the McLay experiment, the McGee et al. experiment controlled for
the difficulty of stimulus material, it controlled for the number of
teaching trials in each experimental condition and it controlled the
reinforcement values and schedule of reinforcement across both teaching
conditions.

The results from these two experiments provide support for the notion
that, if the number of learning opportunities are kept constant the
question of whether learning opportunities are child initiated or
teacher initiated may be of much less importance than that claimed by
the proponents of developmentally appropriate practice. What does appear
to be very important is the number of learning opportunities provided
for each name or concept which the child is expected to learn.

If it is the number of learning opportunities which is the critical
variable, this would explain the contrary results reported by Cavallaro
and Bambara (1982) and Miranda-Linne and Melin (1992) who failed to
control the number of learning opportunities which occurred during each
teaching condition.

There is as yet no consistent pattern across these four studies with
respect to stimulus generalisation. This is almost certainly a function
of a lack of agreement as to how generalisation should be measured. In
the McLay experiment, generalisation was assessed only with respect to
the names which had been acquired. However, this requirement was not met
by Cavallaro and Bambara (1982) or by Miranda-Linne & Melin (1992).
There seems to be little logic in testing for stimulus generalisation
when the responses involved have yet to be acquired and are still being
prompted in the training setting.

The results of the research reviewed in this section indicate that there
is a place for both child initiated and adult initiated learning
interactions in the preschool setting. This position is consistent with
the position which has been adopted by both the National Association for
the Education of Young Children (NAEYC, 1997) and the Division of Early
Childhood of the Council for Exceptional Children. The most recent
guidelines from both of these organisations recommend an appropriate mix
of child and adult initiated learning activities in the preschool
setting.
:::

::: referencesList
#### References

-   Cavallaro, C. & Bambara, L. (1982). Two strategies for teaching
    language during free play TASH Journal, 7, 80-92.
-   Hart, B. & Risley, T. (1968). Establishing use of descriptive
    adjectives in the spontaneous speech of disadvantaged preschool
    children. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 1, 109-120.
-   Hart, B. & Risley, T. (1974). Using preschool materials to modify
    the language of disadvantaged children. Journal of Applied Behavior
    Analysis, 7, 243-256.
-   Hart, B. & Risley, T. (1975). Incidental teaching of language in the
    preschool setting. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 8, 411-420.
-   Hart, B. & Risley, T. (1980). In vivo language intervention:
    Unanticipated general effects. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis,
    13, 407-432.
-   McLay, L. K (2003). Acquisition, retention and generalisation of
    object names in 4 year old children during child initiated and adult
    initiated learning interactions. Unpublished M.Ed. dissertation.
    University of Canterbury, School of Education.
-   McGee, G. G., Krantz, P. J., & McClannahan, L. E. (1985). The
    facilitative effects of incidental teaching on preposition use by
    autistic children. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 18, 17-31.
-   Miranda-Linne, F. & Melin, L. (1992). Acquisition, generalisation
    and spontaneous use of color adjectives: A comparison of incidental
    teaching and traditional discrete-trial procedures for children with
    autism. Research in Developmental Disabilities, 13, 191-210.
-   NAEYC Position Statement. (1996). Developmentally appropriate
    practice in early child-hood programs serving children from birth
    through to age 8. National Association for the Education of Young
    Children. Retrieved from naeyc.org/resources/position_statements.
-   Warren, S. F. & Kaiser, A. P. (1986). Incidental language teaching:
    A critical review. Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders, 51,
    291-299.
:::
