---
grand_parent: 'The transition from craft to science '
great_grand_parent: 'The problem to be solved '
great_great_grand_parent: 'Welcome to Teacher Education''s Core Knowledge and Skills.'
has_children: false
layout: default
nav_order: 3
parent: 'Improving the quality of research into learning and teaching '
title: 'Correcting the imbalance and upgrading educational research methods training '
---
# Correcting the imbalance and upgrading educational research methods training 


::: documentByline
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
:::

::: {#parent-fieldname-text-f9a291e936734fdc9e1aa9bc648fb489}
Investigators who call themselves "scientists" use a wide range of
different investigative procedures (Phillips, 2006). For example,
questions about "what works" are essentially causal questions and, in
general, an experimental analysis is regarded as the best way to
discover the effects of alternative procedures and innovations (Church,
1996; Raudenbush, 2005). In our attempts to determine the effects of
particular teaching strategies we also need to discover which children
are affected, which learning outcomes are affected and in which
situations these effects occur. Thirdly we need to discover why
particular procedures work, why they work for some children and not
others, and when they are likely to fail. Expertise in a range of
experimental, correlational and descriptive methods is required to
successfully address these different kinds of questions

At the present time, many educational researchers have been trained only
in descriptive methods (the so called "qualitative" methods) and there
is a shortage of researchers who have been trained in the methods which
are required for epidemiological research, scientific programme design,
programme evaluation, time series analyses of children's learning, and
experimental practitioner research. A researcher who is competent in
only ethnographic and narrative methods, is quite severely limited with
respect to the kinds of research questions which they can study.

If we are to begin the move to evidence-based practice this imbalance
will need to be corrected. We will need to upgrade our research methods
training to the point where we can train greater numbers of research
students (at all levels) in the scientific methods needed for sound
epidemiological studies, instructional design work, programme evaluation
and experimental practitioner research.

**1. Undergraduate research training**

In order to produce a new generation of teachers and teacher educators
who see research as an integral part of their career, research
experience at the undergraduate level will need to be very considerably
upgraded for all education students. At the undergraduate level it is
appropriate that this upgrading occur within the context of taught
courses. This goal is most likely to be accomplished if most of the
undergraduate courses contain a research element (as is customary in
university courses). In some courses this element will involve content
which has been derived from scientific research in education, in some
courses this element will involve a study of half a dozen relevant
scientific experiments, in some courses this element may involve
completing a small review of a set of experiments relevant to one of the
issues raised in the course, and in some courses this element may
involve a small closely supervised research exercise in measuring
learning or in measuring the effects of some kind of teaching on
learning (Church 1992, 1996.)

**2. Masters level research training**

In order to produce teachers who can undertake experimental practitioner
studies, who can design and carry out programme evaluations, who can
participate in larger research programmes, and who can eventually move
into positions as university teacher educators, research training at the
masters level will need to be very considerably upgraded for all
post-graduate education students regardless of speciality. At the
postgraduate level it is appropriate that this upgrading occur within
research methods courses followed by supervised thesis research. While
it is likely that the masters degree which consists solely of taught
courses is likely to survive for some time to come it is important that
students enrolling in taught masters degrees clearly understand that
such degrees will no longer provide a route to a university position
should the practitioner later seek a university career.

As a very first step in this upgrading it is essential that research
methods training be reviewed so that students with little or no research
methods background can be provided with the introductory level training
which they missed out on during their undergraduate degree studies and
which they will need in order to gain entry into the main masters level
research methods courses.

The main masters level research methods courses, in turn, will need to
be reviewed to ensure that essential questioning, observation,
measurement and design skills are being mastered and to ensure that
students are learning how to conduct developmental studies,
epidemiological studies, single case experimental research and
randomised groups research at an advanced level. In order to ensure that
adequate levels of competence are achieved, entry to masters level
research courses will need to be limited to those students who meet
specified entry requirements and some specialisation with respect to
particular methods should probably be allowed. Once the student has
reached an adequate level of competence in selected research methods,
they should proceed to a supervised thesis project which examines a
worthwhile question using a method which meets conventional standards of
internal validity (measurement reliability) and external validity
(generalisability).

In the case of newly established faculties of education, it will be
necessary for faculty staff to join post-graduate students in the newly
upgraded masters level research methods courses -- at least until the
faculty contains adequate numbers of staff with advanced qualifications
in the epidemiological methods, developmental methods, single case
experimental methods, randomised groups experiments, and statistical
methods necessary for scientific research into learning and teaching.

**3. Doctoral level research training**

The kinds of preparation required for productive PhD level research in
the 21st century have been well described by Eisenhart and DeHaan (2005)
who argue that educational researchers need training in the principles
of scientific inquiry, training in the diverse research methods required
to answer different kinds of questions, and an interdisciplinary
research orientation.

In order to produce teacher educators with PhD level qualifications in
research, the level of work which is currently required for a PhD will
need to be carefully reviewed, as should the policies governing entry to
the degree. Prior to admission to the degree, candidates should be
required to demonstrate that they meet at least the following
requirements:

\(a\) In all cases that they have an extensive content knowledge
including an extensive knowledge of the results of previous research in
their area of interest (Boote & Beille, 2005)

(b)In all cases that the question which they propose to study is
worthwhile in the sense that it could conceivably generate new knowledge
and not just recycle existing knowledge

(c)In all cases that they have acquired the skills necessary to design
and carry out a series of investigations which have a high probability
of answering the question(s) under examination

(d)In the case of studies of teaching or learning that they will be
collecting accurate data about learning (not just achievement), that
they will employ direct observation procedures to gather this data, and
that they will preserve the records of behaviour change in each
individual learner.

(e)In the case of studies of teaching that they will not only collect
accurate measures of learning or achievement, but also to make an
accurate record (e.g. a video record or equivalent) of all of the
teaching under examination so that the relationships between teaching
and learning can be reliably identified during data analysis.

We will know that the move to evidence-based practice is becoming more
likely as increasing numbers of PhD candidates begin to engage in
research projects which meet these requirements.
:::

::: referencesList
#### References

-   Boote, D. N. & Beille, P. (2005). Scholars before researchers: On
    the centrality of the dissertation literature review in research
    preparation. Educational Researcher, 34(6), 3-15.
-   Church, R. J. (1992). Teaching behaviour analysis research skills to
    undergraduates. Paper presented to 4th World Congress on Behaviour
    Therapy, Gold Coast, Australia, July 1992.
-   Church, R. J. (1996). Within-subject experimental analysis: A guide
    for students in education. \"State of the Art\" Monograph Number 5.
    Palmerston North: N.Z. Association for Research in Education.
-   Eisenhart, M., & DeHaan, R. L. (2005). Doctoral preparation of
    scientifically based education researchers. Educational Researcher,
    34, 3-13.
-   Phillips, D. C. (2006). Muddying the waters: The many purposes of
    educational inquiry. In C. F. Conrad & R. C. Serlin (Eds.), The Sage
    handbook for research in education: Engaging ideas and enriching
    inquiry (pp. 7-21). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
-   Raudenbush, S. R. (2005). Learning from attempts to improve
    schooling: The contribution of methodological diversity. Educational
    Researcher, 35(5), 25-31.
:::
