---
grand_parent: 'Learning interactions and their component events '
great_grand_parent: 'Important learning and teaching events '
great_great_grand_parent: 'Teacher Education''s Core Knowledge and Skills.'
has_children: false
layout: default
nav_order: 1
parent: 'The components of individual learning interactions '
title: 'The distinction between stimuli and responses '
---
# The distinction between stimuli and responses


```yaml
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
```


The description and analysis of a learning interaction requires us to
distinguish between (a) learner responses and (b) the stimuli (the
objects and events) to which the learner is responding.

**Response.** When we want to talk about a particular behaviour, we
usually use the term *response*. In a learning interaction, the response
is the action performed by the learner. One of the characteristics of a
response, as a unit of behaviour, is that most responses are used over
and over again. The response "following the teacher's instruction" is a
unit of behaviour which is likely to be engaged in by a particular child
several times today, several times tomorrow, and so on.

Responses can be either overt responses which we can see (e.g. reading
aloud) or covert responses which we cannot see (e.g. reading silently or
thinking about what one has read). For example when the teacher displays
12 counters and says "How many have I got now?" and the learner mentally
counts to 12 and puts her hand up, the display of 12 counters plus the
question is the stimulus (because it is the counters and the question
which determine the response) and the responses are (a) mentally
counting to 12 and (b) hand-raising.

**Stimulus.** A *stimulus* (plural *stimuli*) is something which is
seen, heard, or otherwise sensed by the learner and which has an effect
on what the learner does, thinks or feels. If a parent issues an
instruction and the learner follows that instruction, then the parent's
instruction is a stimulus for the response "following the instruction".
Teachers spend much of their time providing things for children to
respond to: letters to be copied, stories to be read, maths activities
to be completed, questions to be answered, and so on. Many of these
function as stimuli. Some stimuli are events which are seen (e.g. a
printed word to be read), some are events which are heard (e.g. an oral
question from the teacher), some are events which are smelled or tasted
(e.g. the smell of sulphur dioxide in a chemistry class), and some are
events which are felt (e.g. a prod with a ruler from the child sitting
behind you).

The great majority of stimuli are outside the learner but stimuli may be
internal as when the learner responds to bodily sensations of various
kinds (e.g. the sensation of a full bladder, the pain from a twisted
ankle, a pounding heart, and so on).
