# Conditions necessary for the extinction of conditioned anxiety/fear responses \n

::: documentByline
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
:::

::: {#parent-fieldname-text-b003776868fd43fab1be3eabf35510fc}
From time to time learners arrive in the classroom with anxiety
responses or fears which have already been conditioned to certain
learning tasks, or with well developed negative attitudes to school, to
teachers, or to certain learning tasks as a result of past experiences.
For example, a child may have developed a fear of reading activities as
a result of a prior history of failure in reading, or a child may have
developed a school phobia because of a previous history of bullying at
school, or a child may have developed a strong dislike for teachers or
schools because of a past history of punishment for misbehaviour in this
setting.

Because dysfunctional anxiety reactions to certain situations are
acquired (learned) they can be unlearned. The unlearning of a
dysfunctional anxiety response is referred to as *respondent
extinction*. The student who brings a previously conditioned anxiety
response or fear response to the classroom requires a special kind of
teaching programme - one which will break the link between the
conditioned eliciting stimulus and the emotional response which the
stimulus elicits. For example, the student who feels anxious when asked
to read requires a teaching programme which breaks the link between
books (the conditioned eliciting stimulus) and feelings of anxiety (the
emotional response which the books elicit). Programmes which function to
extinguish previously acquired anxieties and fears are referred to as
*respondent extinction* programmes.

The only essential condition which must be met in order for respondent
extinction to occur is repeated exposure to the conditioned anxiety
eliciting stimulus under circumstances in which the real fear eliciting
stimulus never occurs. When the learner is exposed repeatedly to an
anxiety eliciting stimulus without any aversive consequence, then that
stimulus gradually loses the power to elicit anxiety (e.g. Croghan &
Musante, 1975; Luiselli, 1978; Stableford, 1979; Van Hasselt, Hersen,
Bellack, Rosenblum & Lamparski, 1979).
:::
