---
grand_parent: 'Important learning and teaching events '
great_great_grand_parent: 'Teacher Education''s Core Knowledge and Skills.'
has_children: true
layout: default
nav_order: 3
parent: 'Functional sequences of learning interactions '
title: 'Practice response sequences '
---
# Practice response sequences


```yaml
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
```


One of the functions of the learning activities which occur in
classrooms is to provide learners with the opportunity to acquire and
practice curriculum relevant skills and understandings. We are using the
term "practice opportunity" to refer to learning interactions involving
the *same* response, behaviour, or skill. (We have had to invent this
term because there is no word in the English language which refers to
"learning interactions involving the same behaviour".) Some of the ways
in which practice responses can vary have already been described. For
example, we have already distinguished between overt and covert practice
responses, constructed responses and selection responses, various
response modes, various types of practice opportunities, and variations
in response effort.

The changes that we refer to as learning all require a certain amount of
practice, that is, they are likely to be acquired only if the learner
experiences an adequate number of practice opportunities. When children
are practising a new skill or understanding, this practice can vary in
many ways. It can vary with respect to the length of the practice
session, the number of different responses which are practised in any
one session, the number of times the same response is practised in any
one session, the ratio of yet-to-be learned to previously learned
responses in a session, the total number of practice opportunities
experienced by the learner, the distribution of these practice responses
in time, whether the practice is timed or untimed and the type of
criterion which is used in deciding when the learner should cease
practice on the current skill and progress to the next skill in the
curriculum.
