---
grand_parent: 'Types of research evidence '
great_great_grand_parent: 'Teacher Education''s Core Knowledge and Skills.'
has_children: true
layout: default
nav_order: 6
parent: 'How are the effects of teaching on learning to be measured? '
title: 'The generalisability of experimental results '
---
# The generalisability of experimental results


```yaml
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
```


It is one thing to identify a functional relationship between a
particular independent variable (such as a certain kind of practice
activity) and a particular dependent variable (such as rate of learning
to read) and quite another thing to identify the circumstances under
which this effect occurs. Does this particular independent variable
affect just a single learning outcome, or does it affect a variety of
learning outcomes and, if so, which? Does this particular cause and
effect relationship occur with just a certain type of learner or does it
occur with learners with widely different learning histories and, if so,
which learners? Does the effect occur only under certain circumstances,
or does it occur under a range of circumstances and, if so, which
circumstances? Attempts to answer these kinds of questions are attempts
to explore the *generality* of a particular functional relationship.
Generality is also referred to by many writers as *generalisability*.
These two terms are synonymous. In social science research, the
generalisability of an experimental result is often referred to as the
*external validity* of an experimental result.

In order to identify the generality of a given effect, the scientist
must engage in a systematic programme of research in an attempt to
identify the conditions under which a given effect occurs and doesn't
occur. This process is referred to as *systematic replication* (Sidman,
1960). A series of studies which have as their aim an explorations of
the conditions under which a given effect occurs and doesn't occur are
referred to as systematic replication studies. Systematic replication
involves repeating the experimental study of a particular functional
relationship in additional studies during which one or more features of
the original experiments are systematically varied. These systematic
replication studies may vary the experimenters, the circumstances, the
characteristics of the learners, the type of learning outcome and so on.


#### References

-   Sidman, M. (1960). Tactics of scientific research: Evaluating
    experimental data in psychology. New York: Basic Books.
