---
has_children: false
layout: default
nav_order: 2
title: 'Accuracy, threats to accuracy and the assessment of accuracy '
---
# Accuracy, threats to accuracy and the assessment of accuracy 


::: documentByline
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
:::

::: {#parent-fieldname-text-4382621ecf1d4029998a5bdcc1886bbf}
The second question which may be asked of research data is the question
"Does this data accurately represent the events which actually occurred
during the course of each observation?" The match between the data which
was collected and the events which actually occurred is referred to as
data *accuracy*. "Accuracy is the term which is used to describe the
extent to which observed values approximate the \'true\' state of
nature" (Johnston & Pennypacker, 1993, p. 138), that is, the behaviour
actually engaged in, or the events which actually happened. If a child
actually spelled 19 out of a sample of 20 spelling words correctly and
the investigator reported this as a score of 19/20, the investigator\'s
report would be said to be an accurate report. Some qualitative
researchers use the term *confirmability* for accuracy, some (e.g.
Mertens, 1998) use the term *credibility*, and some (e.g. Maxwell, 1992)
use the term *validity.*

In order to obtain accurate results, the observation procedure must be
one which can be operated in a reliable fashion. Note, however, that an
observation procedure can be reliable without being accurate. My
bathroom scales may produce a highly consistent result (always giving my
weight as 70 kg) but be consistently inaccurate (if my actual weight is
80 kg).

**Threats to measurement accuracy.** There are many factors which can
operate (during the course of a series of observations) to compromise
the accuracy of the data which is being collected. The main threat to
data accuracy is an unreliable observation or testing procedure.
However, it is possible for even a reliable observation procedure to
produce inaccurate data. For example, observation periods which are too
short may produce inaccurate estimates of how often a particular
behaviour is engaged in, tests which are too short may produce
inaccurate estimates of a learner\'s current level of achievement, and
infrequent tests (or observations) may produce less accurate estimates
of rate of progress than more frequent tests (or observations).

Generally speaking, mechanical recording (e.g. video recording) produces
more accurate data than recording by human observers, idemnotic
measurement procedures produce more accurate measures of human skill and
ability than vaganotic measurement procedures, direct observation
produces more accurate data than indirect observation (e.g. rating
scales and verbal reports), records which are made at the time when the
behaviour change occurred tend to be more accurate than records which
are made later (i.e. from memory), and observers who are blind to
experimental conditions tend to produce more accurate records than
observers who are aware of experimental conditions (Johnston &
Pennypacker, 1993; Kazdin, 1977). Longer observation sessions produce
more accurate estimates of behavioural frequency than shorter
observation sessions, tests which contain a number of questions testing
the same competency produce more accurate estimates of level of
competency than tests which contain only one or two questions on that
competency and repeated observations or tests, spaced over time, provide
a more accurate picture of behaviour change (learning) than just one or
two observations or tests.

**Assessing and reporting data accuracy.** In order to assess the
accuracy of the data which are being generated by a particular
observation or testing procedure, it is necessary to obtain performance
measures using not only the procedure being used for the research but
also using a second procedure, the accuracy of which is already known
(Johnston & Pennypacker, 1993). For example, the accuracy of the timings
provided by the particular stopwatch used by the researcher might be
evaluated by comparing them against the timings provided by a clock
which is already known to be accurate, or the accuracy of a teacher\'s
marking of a spelling test might be assessed by comparing the teacher\'s
judgements against the dictionary spellings of the same words.

The assessment of measurement accuracy also requires that a record of
the learner\'s behaviour or performance be preserved in semi-permanent
form. For example, the accuracy of the decisions which are being made by
a referee, the judge at a championship competition, or an observer might
be checked by comparing these decisions against the results of multiple
viewings of a videotape of the same performance.

It is often difficult in educational and psychological research to
evaluate the accuracy of the data which is being collected. In those
cases where data accuracy has been assessed, however, it is not
necessary to assess reliability because any procedure which produces
accurate data must have been a reliable procedure.
:::

::: referencesList
#### References

-   Johnston, J. M., & Pennypacker, H. S. (1993). Strategies and tactics
    of behavioral research (2nd ed.). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
    Associates.
-   Kazdin, A. E. (1977). Artefact, bias, and complexity of assessment:
    the ABCs of reliability. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 10,
    141-150. Martella, R. C., Nelson, R. & Marchand-Martella, N. E.
    (1999). Research methods: Learning to become a critical research
    consumer. Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
-   Maxwell, J. A. (1992). Understanding validity in qualitative
    research. Harvard Educational Review, 62, 279-300.
-   Mertens, D. M. (1998). Research methods in education and psychology:
    Integrating diversity with quantitative and qualitative approaches.
    Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
:::
