---
grand_parent: 'Presentation, prompting and practice variables '
great_grand_parent: 'The effects of instructional events '
great_great_grand_parent: 'Welcome to Teacher Education''s Core Knowledge and Skills.'
has_children: false
layout: default
nav_order: 6
parent: 'Prompting variables and their effects '
title: 'Effects of variations in the accuracy level of responding during instruction '
---
# Effects of variations in the accuracy level of responding during instruction


```yaml
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
```


Prompts have a crucial role to play during the initial learning phase of
any new skill because they function to increase the level of correct
responding (and to reduce the number of errors) made by the learner. The
cue which is used to prompt the correct response may function as a
strong prompt making the correct response highly likely, or it may
function is a weak prompt which provides only a small degree of
assistance. Learners make many more practice errors following weak
prompts than they do following strong prompts.

There is considerable debate amongst teachers and teacher educators
regarding the relative merits of scaffolding with strong prompts and
scaffolding with weak prompts. A majority of teachers of reading, for
example, argue that the first prompt following a hesitation or a miscue
should always be a weak cue, clue, or prompt.

There has been some controlled research into this question. For example,
a number of studies have compared the relative efficiency of the
increasing assistance procedure (which always begin with a weak prompt)
against more directive prompting procedures such as time delay in
teaching students to read sight words (Gast, Ault, Wolery, Doyle, &
Belanger, 1988), to produce manual signs (Bennett, Gast, Wolery &
Schuster, 1986), to operate household appliances (Steege, Wacker, &
McMahon, 1987) and to complete everyday tasks (Wolery, Ault, Gast, &
Doyle, 1990).

In every one of these comparisons the increasing assistance procedure
(the procedure which begins by providing only a weak prompt) proved to
be the least efficient. That is, it proved to be the procedure which
resulted in the greatest number of incorrect responses and hence, the
procedure which required the greatest number of practice responses.

There appears to be a direct relationship between the accuracy level
during instruction and the scores obtained on post-experimental measures
of learning or retention. McWilliams (2005) reviewed 39 controlled
experiments in which the experimental treatments had resulted in at
least a 5 per cent difference in the accuracy level during instruction.
These experiments generated 44 comparisons. In 32 cases, the condition
with the higher accuracy rate during instruction produced the higher
post-experimental score. In 8 cases the post experimental differences
were too small for any conclusions to be drawn. There were only 4 cases
where the correlation was negative: two experiments where the high
accuracy treatment involved far more prompting than was necessary but
the students were unable to skip unnecessary steps as they were in the
comparison treatment, one experiment in which the high accuracy rate was
a function of copying responses, and one experiment in which the high
accuracy treatment involved practising a small number of responses over
and over.

Not only do learner errors delay acquisition, tasks with high error
rates are often experienced by students as "difficult". If error rates
are too high (because the level of assistance is too low), students may
become discouraged, motivation to practise may be reduced, and the
student may begin to avoid the apparently difficult task. It follows
that an appropriate prompting procedure which produces an adequate level
of correct responding during instruction may be a determinant of student
motivation. Barak Rosenshine, who has written a number of reviews of
research on teaching, is of the opinion that teachers should use
prompting procedures which ensure that the learner is responding
correctly at least 80 per cent of the time (Rosenshine, 1983, p. 341).


#### References

-   Bennett, D. L., Gast, D. L., Wolery, M., & Schuster, J. (1986). Time
    delay and system of least prompts: A comparison in teaching manual
    sign production. Education and Training of the Mentally Retarded,
    21, 117-129.
-   Gast, D. L., Ault, M. J., Wolery, M., Doyle, P. M., & Belanger, S.
    (1988). Comparison of constant time delay and the system of least
    prompts in teaching sight word reading to students with moderate
    retardation. Education and Training in Mental Retardation, 23,
    117-128.
-   McWilliams, K. 2005. An analysis of variables affecting
    instructional efficiency. Unpublished PhD thesis. University of
    Canterbury, School of Education.
-   Rosenshine, B. (1983). Teaching functions in instructional programs.
    The Elementary School Journal, 83, 335-351.
-   Steege, M. W., Wacker, D. P., & McMahon, C. M. (1987). Evaluation of
    the effectiveness of two stimulus prompt strategies with severely
    handicapped students. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 20,
    293-299.
-   Wolery, M., Ault, M. J., Gast, D. L., & Doyle, P. M. (1990).
    Comparison of constant time delay and the system of least prompts in
    teaching chained tasks. Education and Training in Mental
    Retardation, 25, 243-257.
