---
has_children: false
layout: default
nav_order: 0
title: 'Effects of continuous versus intermittent schedules of consequences '
---
# Effects of continuous versus intermittent schedules of consequences 


::: documentByline
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
:::

::: {#parent-fieldname-text-bfe9032e7b0548729e9d6ff7547143d3}
Generally speaking the introduction of schedules in which particular
low-rate responses are reinforced frequently rather than infrequently
result in the most rapid behaviour changes (McLaughlin & Malaby, 1975b;
Zanolli & Daggett, 1998).

The schedule which results in the most frequent reinforcement is the
continuous schedule -- where every occurrence of a particular response
is reinforced (or punished). Generally speaking continuous reinforcement
produces faster behaviour change and faster acquisition than schedules
in which target responses are only intermittently reinforced (Olendick &
Pear, 1980).

The same is true with respect to punishment contingencies. If every
error is corrected, the correct responses are learned more rapidly than
if only some errors are corrected (Morton, Heward & Alber, 1998). If
every misbehaviour is punished, misbehaviours are suppressed much more
rapidly than is the case where misbehaviours are punished only from time
to time (Clark, Rowberry, Baer & Baer, 1973; Pfiffner, O'Leary, Rosén &
Sanderson, 1985).

However, continuous schedules of reinforcement, although they tend to
produce rapid changes in performance, also result in performances which
are the least resistant to extinction (Kazdin & Polster, 1973). This is
because a change from continuous reinforcement to non-reinforcement is
very easy for the learner to recognise.

Intermittent schedules of reinforcement on the other hand tend to
produce performances which are more resistant to extinction.
Intermittent reinforcement produces more persistent responding --
responding which is likely to continue even in the face of
non-reinforcement (Kazdin & Polster, 1973).

However, it is clear from the research that if the reinforcement
generated by a particular behaviour becomes too infrequent, the learner
may simply cease to engage in that behaviour (Martens, Ardoin, Hilt,
Lannie, Panahon & Wolfe, 2002; McLaughlin & Malaby, 1975a, 1975b; Simon,
Ayllon & Milan, 1982). This is the extinction effect reviewed above. Not
only does the learner abandon behaviours which are only infrequently
reinforced, they may also lose interest in that particular activity. If
the learner ceases to make progress as a result of practising a
particular skill, they may lose interest in practising that skill.

Extinction effects are a persistent problem in the classroom. This is
because teachers simply cannot maintain high rates of social
reinforcement for each and every child in a class of 25-30 children.
Thomas, Presland, Grant and Glynn (1978) found that N.Z. teachers gave
explicit approval not much more than about 12 times an hour. Rossiter\'s
observations of N.Z. Year 1 and Year 2 teachers revealed that the
teachers who were observed provided positive reactions something less
than 25 times an hour (Rossiter, 1982).

The research into schedule effects has very important implications for
teaching. During the initial phase of learning it is almost always
appropriate to continuously reinforce improvements and to correct each
error as it occurs. In the long term, however, persistence and repeated
effort even in the face of failure is also an important teaching goal.
This means that once a new behaviour has been acquired, the
reinforcement of that behaviour must gradually be made less regular and
less predictable. Otherwise, the desired persistence will not develop.
The makes the ability to thin the reinforcement for individual students
as they move from one phase of learning to the next a very important
teaching skill.
:::

::: referencesList
#### References

-   Clark, H. B., Rowbury, T., Baer, A. M., & Baer, D. M. (1973).
    Timeout as a punishing stimulus in continuous and intermittent
    schedules. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 6, 443-455.
-   Kazdin, A. E., & Polster, R. (1973). Intermittent token
    reinforcement and response maintenance in extinction. Behavior
    Therapy, 4, 386-391.
-   Martens, B. K., Ardoin, S. P., Hilt, A. M., Lannie, A. L.
    Panahon, C. J., & Wolfe, L. A. (2002). Sensitivity of children's
    behavior to probabilistic reward: Effects of a decreasing-ratio
    lottery system on math performance. Journal of Applied Behavior
    Analysis, 35, 403-406.
-   McLaughlin, T. F., & Malaby, J. E. (1975a). Increasing and
    maintaining note-taking behavior in a sixth grade token classroom:
    An analysis of consequences presented in a delayed manner.
    Psychology: A Journal of Human Behavior, 12, 15-23.
-   McLaughlin, T. F., & Malaby, J. E. (1975b). The effects of various
    token reinforcement contingencies on assignment completion and
    accuracy during variable and fixed token exchange schedules.
    Canadian Journal of Behavioural Science, 7, 411-419.
-   Morton, W. L., Heward, W. L., & Alber, S. R. (1998). When to
    self-correct: a comparison of two procedures on spelling
    performance. Journal of Behavioral Education, 8, 321-335.
-   Olendick, D. L., & Pear, J. J. (1980). Differential reinforcement of
    correct responses to probes and prompts in picture-name training
    with severely retarded children. Journal of Applied Behavior
    Analysis, 13, 77-89.
-   Pfiffner, L. J., O\'Leary, S. G., Rosén, L. A., & Sanderson, W. C.
    (1985). A comparison of the effects of continuous and intermittent
    response cost and reprimands in the classroom. Journal of Clinical
    Child Psychology, 14, 348-352.
-   Rossiter, A. (1982). The difficult to teach junior school pupil:
    Identification and teaching strategies. Research Report No 82-1.
    Education Department, University of Canterbury.
-   Simon, S. J., Ayllon, T., & Milan, M. A. (1982). Behavioral
    compensation: Contrast like effects in the classroom. Behavior
    Modification, 6, 407-420.
-   Thomas, J. D., Presland, I. E., Grant, M. D. & Glynn, T. L. (1978).
    Natural rates of teacher approval and disapproval in Grade 7
    classrooms. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 11, 91-94.
-   Zanolli, K., & Daggett, J. (1998). The effects of reinforcement rate
    on the spontaneous social initiations of socially withdrawn
    preschoolers. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 31, 117-125.
:::
