---
has_children: false
layout: default
nav_order: 2
title: 'Effects of varying the size of the practice set '
---
# Effects of varying the size of the practice set 


::: documentByline
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
:::

::: {#parent-fieldname-text-3243f1fbf90f474e894c8f3966efe6a2}
Several variables operate to determine the distribution of practice
responses in time. One of these is the size of the practice set.
Students may engage in learning activities in which they are set to
learn and practice small numbers or larger numbers of responses. For
example a spelling activity may set a child to learn and remember the
spelling of two new words or 10 new words. This variable, size of the
practice set interacts with the time allocated to the practice session
to determine how many times each recently acquired response will be
practised during that session.

How many items should be taught and practised at one time? In an
experiment by Bryant, Drabin, and Gettinger (1981) three groups of
10-year old students studied new spelling words in groups of three, four
or five words at a time. All three groups learned the same number of
spelling words over a three day period. In an experiment by Gleason,
Carnine & Vala (1991) 8-year old children with learning disabilities
worked two versions of a CAI programme. One version introduced all seven
to-be-learned items of information at the outset and the other
introduced smaller \"chunks\" of information sequentially. Both groups
learned and remembered all of the information but students in the
sequential introduction treatment made fewer errors, spent one-third the
time, required fewer practice responses on average, and showed less
frustration during practice than the students in the "all at once
group". Johnson, Gersten and Carnine (1987) compared the rate of
acquisition of two groups of secondary school students studying new
vocabulary words. Students who worked on sets of 10 words at a time
learned the new words in much less time than students who worked on sets
of 25 words.

Clearly, not enough research has been done on this question to come to
any conclusions regarding the optimal size of the practice set for
different kinds of learning outcomes. What the three experiments suggest
is that smaller practice sets (in the range of 5 to 10 new items) result
in more rapid acquisition and less frustration than larger set sizes
(sets with more than 10 items).

However, there will be many exceptions to this conclusion. First, it is
possible to have a practice set with too few items in it. If a child can
hold three items in working memory and the practice set contains only
three items, practice responses can be produced from working memory and
little or no learning is likely to occur. It seems safe to assume that
the practice set should always contain more items than the number which
the learner can hold in working memory.

Secondly, practical experience suggests that older learners who have
acquired self-rehearsal skills can easily handle practice sets with 12
to 16 items. Setting such students to learn fewer items than this may
delay the rate at which new facts, concepts and knowledge propositions
will be mastered. Once way of guarding against this is to increase the
set size until the student is no longer getting a score of 100% on tests
given 24 hours following practice.

Thirdly, the practice set for fluency building must consist of more
responses than the learner will be producing when the fluency criterion
is achieved. If the aim is to build single digit addition responses to
60 correct answers per minute then the practice set should contain a
minimum of 80 addition questions so that no ceiling is placed on the
degree of improvement which the student can achieve.

Bryant, N. D., Drabin, I. R., & Gettinger, M. (1981). Effects of varying
unit size on spelling achievement in learning disabled children.
*Journal of Learning Disabilities*, *14*, 200-203.

Gleason, M., Carnine, D., & Vala, N. (1991). Cumulative versus rapid
introduction of new information. *Exceptional Children*, *57*, 353-358.

Johnson, G., Gersten, R., & Carnine, D. (1987). Effects of instructional
design variables on vocabulary acquisition of LD students: A study of
computer-assisted instruction. *Journal of Learning Disabilities*, *20*,
206-213.
:::
