---
grand_parent: 'Functional sequences of learning interactions '
great_grand_parent: 'Important learning and teaching events '
great_great_grand_parent: 'Teacher Education''s Core Knowledge and Skills.'
has_children: false
layout: default
nav_order: 7
parent: 'Response-consequence contingencies '
title: 'Positive punishment contingencies '
---
# Positive punishment contingencies


```yaml
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
```


A behaviour may produce an event (e.g. praise) and continue to be used
as a result. But a behaviour may also produce an event (e.g. reprimands)
and cease to be used as a result. This kind of response-consequence
relationship is called *positive punishment* (or punishment, for short).
The term punishment refers to a state of affairs where a particular
behaviour, when engaged in, produces an outcome or an experience which
has a suppressing effect on the future performance of that behaviour.
The positive punishment contingency is defined as follows.

*If* (a) a behaviour begins to *produce* an event,

and (b) the behaviour *decreases* in frequency (or ceases to be used)

*then*

\(a\) the event is a *punisher* (an aversive consequence),

and (b) the contingency is a *positive punishment* contingency

Note that this technical definition of punishment differs from our
everyday use of the word "punishment". In everyday language, we use the
term punishment to include all of those occasions when someone tries to
suppress or eliminate behaviour by responding negatively - regardless of
whether or not the attempt is successful.

Learning scientists, on the other hand, use the term "punishment" in its
much more limited, technical sense. A response-consequence relationship
meets the definition of a positive punishment contingency *only* if (a)
the behaviour produces an event (having something taken away does not
count), *and* (b) this relationship occurs on a number of occasions (a
single instance does not count), *and* (c) the behaviour begins to be
used less frequently as a result. (A contingency which does not have a
suppressive effect on behaviour is not a punishment contingency in the
technical sense defined above.)

Punishment contingencies are extremely common in everyday life and much
of the behaviour which we might engage in has been suppressed by the
aversive consequences which that behaviour has produced in the past. As
children grow and mature, most cease to take things without asking, they
cease to ask others to do things which they can do for themselves, they
cease to interrupt others when they are talking, and they cease to
demand, to whine, to yell and to throw tantrums in the way that they did
when they were two or three years of age. Most people also learn not to
engage in behaviours which offend and antagonise others and they learn
not to engage in behaviours which are regarded by the culture as
inappropriate, antisocial or illegal.

It is very important to distinguish between negative reinforcement (the
successful avoidance of an unpleasant event) and punishment (the failure
to avoid an unpleasant event) because these two contingencies have quite
different effects. Negative reinforcement motivates continued use of the
successful avoidance responses. Punishment tends to suppress the
punished response.
