---
grand_parent: 'Functional sequences of learning interactions '
great_grand_parent: 'Important learning and teaching events '
great_great_grand_parent: 'Teacher Education''s Core Knowledge and Skills.'
has_children: false
layout: default
nav_order: 14
parent: 'Response-consequence contingencies '
title: 'The move from extrinsic to naturally occurring contingencies '
---
# The move from extrinsic to naturally occurring contingencies


```yaml
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
```


Sometimes teachers choose to motivate poorly motivated students using
some kind of extrinsic reinforcement such as a star chart, preferred
activity reward, or regular praise. These kinds of reinforcers are often
referred to as "extrinsic" reinforcers because they have been introduced
in order to provide the poorly motivated student with an extrinsic
source of motivation. Once the poorly motivated student begins to
experience some success on classroom tasks, and the reinforcement which
results from such success, it will usually be the case that the
extrinsic reinforcement which was initially required will become less
and less necessary. Once this happens the teacher will normally make a
transition from extrinsic sources of reinforcement to naturally
occurring sources of reinforcement to maintain the improvement in
student effort.

Sometimes teachers choose to provide the differential reinforcement
which is necessary for learning using extrinsic sources of reinforcement
such as a star chart, regular praise, public displays of work completed,
and so on. However, once the child has mastered a new skill and can
tell, through self-evaluation, that their performance meets expected
standards, this extrinsic differential reinforcement becomes largely
unnecessary. Here too, the teacher will normally make a transition from
extrinsic sources of reinforcement to the naturally occurring
reinforcement which results from the student's own self-evaluation of
their performance, their success on tests, and so on.

These examples illustrate that fact that the transition from extrinsic
sources of reinforcement to naturally occurring sources of reinforcement
is an important variable and that the way in which the teacher manages
this transition is an important teaching function. Currently however,
this transition (from extrinsic to naturally occurring contingencies of
reinforcement) has no agreed name.
