---
grand_parent: 'Important learning and teaching events '
great_grand_parent: 'Teacher Education''s Core Knowledge and Skills.'
has_children: false
layout: default
nav_order: 6
parent: 'Classroom and context variables '
title: 'Types of instructional adaptations made by the teacher '
---
# Types of instructional adaptations made by the teacher


```yaml
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
```


Every classroom teacher tries to adapt the curriculum and their teaching
procedures to meet the learning needs of individual students. However,
the form and frequency of these adaptations vary widely. Some teachers
make frequent adaptations others make infrequent adaptations. Some make
adaptations just for those students who have been identified as having
an intellectual disability or a specific learning disability while
others make adaptations for any student who is observed to be falling
behind. Some make adaptations just for key competencies such as reading
and others make adaptations across a range of curriculum areas. Some
teachers make adaptations intuitively, some base their adaptation on the
results of diagnostic testing and some base the adaptations on the
results of curriculum based measurement or other forms of progress
monitoring. Some make adaptations which are effective in helping
students to overcome a particular learning difficulty and others make
adaptations which have little or no effect on student learning.

All of these factors contribute to variability in classroom practice and
the resulting variability in the learning and achievements of individual
students. However, while much of this is known intuitively, there has
been very little research into the kinds of instructional adaptations
which teachers make and the effects which these have on student
learning. As a result, we have no agreed names for the different kinds
of adaptations and no agreed procedure for measuring or describing the
types or scheduling of these adaptations. This makes it almost
impossible to control (and to describe) the teaching procedures used in
experimental analyses of the effects of teaching on learning in the
classroom.
