# Presentation content: facts, concepts and principles \n

::: documentByline
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
:::

::: {#parent-fieldname-text-34ad8c534ce54e798444261c00dc4e73}
Presentations may be about facts, concepts, or principles and they may
make reference to definitions, examples, non-examples, and so on.

**Presentations about facts.** A fact is a proposition about a unique
object or event. A proposition is a statement which describes a
relationship between two or more objects, events, or qualities, e.g.
"Beethoven wrote nine symphonies." The utterance "pencil, typewriter,
word processor" is not a fact because it is not a proposition. The
statement "There are 26 letters in the English alphabet" is a fact
because (a) it is a proposition and (b) there is only one English
alphabet. Facts have no generality and it is this feature which
distinguishes them from concepts and principles.

Presentations about a *fact* simply state the fact. For example, "The
distance between the Earth and the moon is 384,400 km." Or "Chlorine is
a poisonous gas." Or "Cook produced the first map of New Zealand."

**Presentations about concepts.** A concept is a class of objects,
qualities or events (rather than a unique object or event). Individual
objects are grouped together because they share a common characteristic
(or set of characteristics). The term "cat", for example, can be used to
refer to all members of the stimulus class "cats", not just the
household cat, and the term "red" can be used to refer to all members of
the stimulus class "red hued objects". Terms such as "cat", and "red"
are referred to as *concept names*.

For any class of objects or events there are *examples* of the class and
*non-examples*. For the concept "noun" there are thousands of examples
-- all the nouns in the language. Words which are not nouns are
non-examples of the concept "noun".

Presentations about a *concept* may be about the name of the concept
(e.g. "These things here are called hexagons"), or they may be about the
definition of the concept ("A hexagon is a six sided figure"), or they
may be about an example of the concept ("Is this one a hexagon? Yes.
Because it has got six sides"), or they may be about a non-example of
the concept ("Is this one a hexagon. No. Because it has got five
sides.")

**Presentations about principles.** A principle is a proposition which
describes the relationship between two or more concepts. In some
accounts, principles are referred to as rules. The principle "plants
grow faster in the summer than in the winter" describes a relationship
between plant growth and seasonal climate. The principle "distance
travelled equals speed over time" describes the relationship between the
concepts "distance", "speed" and "time".

Learning to use a principle correctly is rather like learning to use a
concept name correctly. In learning to use a principle, the learner must
not only learn to state the principle but must also learn to distinguish
between those situations in which the principle applies and those
situations in which the principle does not apply.

Presentations about a *principle* may be about any of the following: (a)
the principle itself, (b) the name of the principle, (c) an example to
which the principle applies, (d) an instance where the principle does
not apply, (e) or a definition, example, or non-example of one of the
concepts contained within the principle.

Being able to distinguish between facts, concepts, and principles is a
matter of some importance for a teacher. This is because different kinds
of learning experiences are needed in order to master new facts, new
concepts, and new principles. Unless a teacher can look at a curriculum
objective and immediately distinguish between the facts, concepts and
principles contained in that objective, the teacher will be unable to
select the kinds of learning experiences which are needed in order to
produce these various different kinds of learning outcomes.
:::
