---
grand_parent: 'How is learning to be observed and recorded? '
great_grand_parent: 'Types of research evidence '
great_great_grand_parent: 'Welcome to Teacher Education''s Core Knowledge and Skills.'
has_children: false
layout: default
nav_order: 3
parent: 'How is learning measured in the three main approaches to research? '
title: 'How do ethnographers observe and measure learning? '
---
# How do ethnographers observe and measure learning?


```yaml
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
```


Ethnographic recording procedures are procedures which have been
developed to provide a holistic picture or portrayal of the social life
or culture of a particular social setting or site. However,
ethnographers do not have an agreed list of the elements of social life
which should be observed and reported on during the course of each
investigation.

**The focus of individual investigations.** Ethnographers do not enter a
particular site "empty-headed". Like all researchers, ethnographers
always have a focus. Lincoln and Guba (1985) suggest that most
ethnographic research is either problem focused, evaluation focused or
policy focused. However, while what is to be observed during the course
of an investigation may be framed up in terms of a general research
question, the ethnographer does not usually enter the setting of
interest with a set of predefined categories of actions, meanings, roles
and so on to be observed. Ethnographers enter the setting of interest in
the expectation that the important categories of actions and meanings
which are relevant to their research focus will "emerge" during the
course of data collection.

**Sampling procedures.** Ethnographers usually select research
participants using purposive (rather than random) sampling procedures.
Purposive sampling procedures include: the selection of typical cases,
the selection of extreme or deviant cases, the selection of cases which
illustrate maximum variation, the selection of critical cases (on the
grounds that what is true of critical cases will be true of other
cases), or the selection of politically important or politically
sensitive cases (Patton, 1990). Increasingly, ethnographers, like their
social science counterparts, are turning to the study of samples of
subjects who possess certain defined characteristics. "For example,
studies proposing to study adolescent alienation must define what
behaviors characterize alienated people, determine what kinds of
adolescents exhibit such behavior, and then locate individuals who
possess those characteristics, who are accessible and who are willing to
be studied" (LeCompte & Preissle, 1993, p. 60-61)

**Data collection procedures.** In order to collect data on
participants\' actions and perspectives, ethnographers employ a range of
data gathering procedures. These include participant surveys,
participant and key informant interviews, life history interviews,
participant observation, non-participant observation, stream of
behaviour records, the examination of written documents, and artefact
collection. The way in which these procedures are to be used is not
governed by any fixed procedural rules. "I know of no \'method\' for the
conduct of qualitative inquiry . . . There is no codified body of
procedures that will tell someone how to produce a perceptive,
insightful, or illuminating study of the educational world" (Eisner,
1991, p. 169).

Observations are typically recorded as detailed long-hand descriptions
which researchers refer to as *field notes*. As part of such notes, "the
researcher will record ideas, strategies, reflections, and hunches, as
well as note patterns that emerge" (Bogdan & Biklen, 1992, p. 107). The
descriptions contained in field notes are usually supplemented by
interviews with key informants. Interviews tend to be in-depth,
open-ended interviews. Ethnographers do not consider their field notes,
interview transcripts, photocopied documents and so on as *data* but
rather as *resources containing data*. "Field notes . . . are not data.
Even interview transcripts are not data. All these are documentary
materials from which data must be constructed through some formal means
of analysis" (Erickson, 1986, p. 149).

**Duration of the investigation.** Many published qualitative studies
have involved a year or more of fieldwork, and "several months" is often
referred to as the minimum time required to complete the field work for
an adequate study (Borg & Gall, 1989). "Qualitative researchers gauge
when they are finished by what they term *data saturation*, the point of
data collection where the information you get becomes redundant" (Bogdan
& Biklen, 1992, p. 68). Because the ethnographer typically spends many
months observing in the setting of interest, he or she is well placed to
study *changes* in the behaviour and understandings of participants.
Some ethnographers do, in fact, study change and others do not and
procedures for the systematic study of change are described in some
qualitative methods texts (e.g. LeCompte and Preissle, 1993) but not in
others. Eisner (1991, p. 33), for example, argues that change is not the
primary focus of ethnographic research.

**Conclusions.** Qualitative researchers have yet to develop a set of
standard procedures for measuring and describing those changes in
competence, motivation, and so on which are included under the heading
of learning. Qualitative researchers do not distinguish between direct
and indirect measures of actions and perspectives, they do not
distinguish between interval scale and nominal scale measures of
behaviour, and they do not distinguish between idemnotic and vaganotic
measures of change. Textbooks on qualitative research methods simply
ignore all of these matters.


#### References

-   Bogdan, R. C., & Biklen, S. K. (1992). Qualitative research for
    education: An introduction to theory and methods. (2nd ed.). Boston:
    Allyn and Bacon.
-   Borg, W. R., & Gall, M. D. (1989). Educational research: An
    introduction (5th ed.). New York: Longman.
-   Eisner, E. W. (1991). The enlightened eye: Qualitative inquiry and
    the enhancement of educational practice. New York: Macmillan
    Publishing Co.
-   Erickson, F. (1986). Qualitative methods in research on teaching.
    In M. C. Wittrock (Ed.), Handbook of research on teaching (3rd ed.,
    pp. 119-161). New York: Macmillan.
-   LeCompte, M. D., & Preissle, J. (1993). Ethnography and qualitative
    design in educational research (2nd ed.). San Diego, CA: Academic
    Press.
-   Lincoln, Y. S., & Guba, E. G. (1985). Naturalistic inquiry. Beverly
    Hills, CA: Sage Publications.
-   Patton, M. Q. (1990). Qualitative evaluation and research methods
    (2nd ed.). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
