---
layout: default
title: "What is the subject matter of cognitive science? 
"
nav_order: Whatisthesubjectmatterofcognitivescience
has_children: false
---
# What is the subject matter of cognitive science? 


::: documentByline
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
:::

::: {#parent-fieldname-text-25e2fbd72a544bf3a5c06f3aa81e621b}
The subject matter of cognitive science is the interrelationship between
overt performance and mental processing. Performance on different kinds
of tasks is assumed to be a function of previously acquired mental
structures and processes, and the performance of different groups of
learners (such as novices and experts) on particular tasks is studied in
an attempt to elucidate the mental processes which are involved in
performing that kind of task. Cognitive scientists use the methods of
social science to build models of the underlying mental structures and
processes which may be operating to regulate perception, understanding
and remembering in human learners (Stillings et al., 1987).

Most cognitive scientists employ a social science methodology. Cognitive
scientists are not the only students of human behaviour who employ a
social science methodology. Measurement psychologists use social science
methods to study the correlations which exist between sets of scores on
various measures of ability, achievement, motivation, self-esteem, and
so on within defined groups of children and adults. Developmental
psychologists use social science methods to describe the average or
typical developmental trajectory which occurs with respect to different
kinds of skills and mental processes from one age level to the next.
Evaluation researchers use the methods of social science to study the
average effects on achievement, motivation, self-esteem, and so on which
result from various types of teaching procedures, teaching materials,
and other kinds of educational provisions.

One of the defining characteristics of cognitive science research is
that, like the other social sciences, it studies the abilities,
achievements, beliefs, and so on of groups of subjects. Cognitive
scientists are limited to the study of the average or typical responses
of groups of people because the statistical procedures which they use to
interpret the results of their investigations are procedures which can
only be applied to *sets* of scores. This is one of the key differences
between cognitive science and behaviour analysis. Behaviour analysts
collect data on the performance of individual learners and are very
interested in the reasons why different individuals respond to the same
task in different ways. Social scientists collect data on the aggregate
performance (e.g., the mean performance) of groups of learners.
Variability between the performances of individuals is of little
interest to the cognitive scientist - of so little interest that such
variability is most commonly referred to as "error variance".

The subject matter of social science includes both the verbal behaviour
of groups of learners (e.g., the average of the test scores obtained by
a sample of children) and the non-verbal behaviour of groups of learners
(e.g., the average time on task of the children in a classroom). It also
includes both overt behaviour (as in the two preceding examples) and the
mental processes which are presumed to govern or direct that overt
behaviour.

The subject matter of cognitive science includes the study of
performance change over time. For example, much child development
research involves studying the improvements in cognitive performance
which occur as the child becomes older. Most commonly, however,
cognitive scientists employ measures of recall, retention or achievement
which are administered just once or twice, rather than making repeated
observations of performance while new skills and understandings are
being acquired.

The research methods of cognitive science, like the research methods of
social scientists in general, have a number of shortcomings which make
these methods less than completely suitable for the scientific study of
learning and teaching.

First, learning involves change over time. Tracking change over time
requires repeated observations of the aspect of performance which is of
interest. The social science methodology, however, is ill suited to the
measurement of change. "The bulk of the design models that have evolved
from the groups comparison tradition become awkward and unmanageable in
the face of continuous measurement" (Johnston & Pennypacker, 1993, p.
97). As a consequence, cognitive scientists have shown little interest
in studying the processes of change. This is not because the study of
change is *impossible* with this method, but because obtaining repeated
measures of the performance of a large number of learners tends to be
*impractical*. By restricting observations of learning to just a single
observation, however, the cognitive scientist can never be sure just
what it is that has been measured. "Different subjects take different
amounts of time to respond to a new condition. A single observation may
catch one subject early in this transition but another after the
transition is complete. The result is two different pictures of the
effects of the condition, and averaging these pictures does not make it
any clearer" (Johnston & Pennypacker, 1993b, p. 184).

Secondly, learning involves changes in the performance and motivations
of individuals. But social science research methods were not developed
to study the performance of individuals. They were developed for an
entirely different purpose, to study population genetics, agricultural
yields, and industrial quality control - where the behavior of
individual members of the class is of little concern (Johnston &
Pennypacker, 1993b). This means that the social science methodology
cannot be used to study questions about behaviours and achievements
which are unique to a particular individual - the child who has a
special talent for music, the child who has a serious learning
disability in maths, or the child who has developed a unique kind of
phobia, for example. It also means that the methodology cannot be used
to study the effects of particular kinds of teaching or motivational
procedures on the development of individual learners. Neuman and
McCormick put it this way:

Say, for example, that a group investigation includes fifth grade
students who have literacy problems, and in that group there are pupils
whose reading achievement ranges from approximately first grade level to
third grade level. When post-intervention behaviors are averaged we
might find on the whole that an improvement has been shown, but, of
course, inherent in any average are scores falling below and above the
mean. . . . Unfortunately, too often findings are reported as general
conclusions: \'The *xyz* technique was effective with fifth grade
disabled readers.\' But application of *xyz* to Susan, who had the
lowest score in the group, or to others with learning levels and
behaviors similar to Susan, may be quite ineffectual. A teacher using
the *xyz* technique with Susan and her counterparts might be doing
little to foster the learning of these children (Neuman & McCormick,
1995, p. 4).

To summarise, the subject matter of cognitive science research tends to
overlap only to some degree with the subject matter which is of interest
to teachers, teacher educators and teaching researchers. Because the
method can only be used to study the characteristics of groups of
people, social scientists have shown relatively little interest in
questions about the origins and causes of differences between learners,
in questions about the effects of particular teaching strategies on
individual learners, or in questions about how particular teaching
strategies should be adapted to meet the needs of individual learners -
even although these are the questions which are of most interest to
practitioners. "Empirical research based upon large populations and
involving a massive investment in . . . time and effort does not
generate information which can be of assistance to teachers. . . \[who\]
must be responsive to the particular errors of particular children"
(Macdonald & Pettit, 1991, p. 401).
:::

::: referencesList
#### References

-   Johnston, J. M., & Pennypacker, H. S. (1993). Readings for
    strategies and tactics of behavioral research (2nd ed.). Hillsdale:
    Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
-   Macdonald G., & Pettit, P. (1981). Semantics and social science.
    London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
-   Neuman, S. B., & McCormick, S. (Eds.). (1995). Single subject
    experimental research: Applications for literacy. Newark:
    International Reading Association.
-   Stillings, N. A., Feinstein, M. H., Garfield, J. L., Rissland, E.
    L., Rosenbaum, D. A., Weisler, S. E., & Baker-Ward, L. (1987).
    Cognitive science: An introduction. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
:::
