# Explanations in a physical vocabulary and in a non-physical vocabulary \n

::: documentByline
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
:::

::: {#parent-fieldname-text-1663d57661de4d63a32723d52abd8b71}
Some researchers insist that attempts to explain must be framed in a
physical vocabulary, that is, they must point to a cause or an
independent variable which can be seen, heard, or felt - even if only by
the actor (Baum & Heath, 1992). Explaining an improvement in performance
in terms of teaching which has been provided, or practice activities
which have been completed, or a drug which has been ingested, are
examples of explanations in a physical vocabulary. Teaching can be
observed, practising can be observed, and taking a drug can be observed.

Other researchers allow that explanations can be framed in a
non-physical vocabulary, that is, that they may refer to entities or
processes which are not observable and which could not ever be observed.
Explaining improvements in performance in terms of a short term memory
process and a long term memory process, for example, are instances of
explanations in a non-physical vocabulary. This is because mental
processes are in principle unobservable. No one, not even the actor, can
see or sense the transfer of information from short term memory to long
term memory. The word "memory" is used as a metaphor, not as a pointer
to an observable physical process or an observable location in the
learner's brain.
:::

::: referencesList
#### References

-   Baum, W. M., & Heath, J. L. (1992). Behavioral explanations and
    intentional explanations in psychology. American Psychologist, 47,
    1312-1317.
:::
