# Distinguishing between independent variables and dependent variables \n

::: documentByline
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
:::

::: {#parent-fieldname-text-e32a82076bc247b79674dbd0a3b8336a}
When the subject matter is teaching and/or learning the dependent
variable which is of primary interest is learning, that is, improvement
in the *behaviour* of the learner. Other behaviours such as intelligence
(acting intelligently), self-esteem (acting confidently), metacognition
(using appropriate learning procedures) and so on cannot be used as the
*independent variables* in an experiment because they are behaviours and
they cannot be manipulated without first manipulating the learner's
environment. If they are "manipulated" simply by selecting samples of
students who do and do not engage in these behaviours then this makes
the study a correlational study. If a behaviour such as "metacognition"
is manipulated by, say, teaching metacognitive skills, then this *can*
be studied experimentally. In this case, teaching metacognitive skills
is the independent variable (the environmental factor), and there are
two dependent variables: (a) use of the newly acquired metacognitive
skills (a behaviour), and (b) performance on the test of learning. Both
(a) and (b) are behaviours.

The distinction between independent variables (which may be having an
effect on learning) and dependent variables (the changes in behaviour or
knowledge or attitude which we refer to as learning) is a matter of very
great importance. This is because cognitive scientists routinely confuse
the two. For example, a search for cognitive science reports on
self-esteem will identify many reports in which a measure of self-esteem
is the dependent variable, that is, the learning outcome. But the same
search will identify an even larger number of reports where self-esteem
has been used as the independent variable by, for example, comparing the
performance of groups of people some of whom exhibit high levels of
behaviour indicative of self esteem and some of whom engage in low
levels of such behaviour. While this simply reflects a confusion which
is extremely common in everyday talk, it is not a confusion which would
ever be tolerated in a *scientific* study of learning processes.

In order to develop a useful theory of learning, learning researchers
must come to some agreement as to what properly constitutes an
independent variable and what properly constitutes a dependent variable.
The present practice of using learning outcomes such as reading level as
the dependent variable (the measure of learning outcome) on some
occasions and the independent variable (one of the factors presumed to
be necessary for learning) on other occasions is most unlikely to lead
to an increased understanding of the factors which are necessary for
learning.
:::
