---
layout: default
title: "What is the subject matter of qualitative research? 
"
nav_order: Whatisthesubjectmatterofqualitativeresearch
has_children: false
---
# What is the subject matter of qualitative research? 


::: documentByline
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
:::

::: {#parent-fieldname-text-cd15dfba4ea9442dadce2d1b6946a965}
For educational ethnographers, interpretive researchers and most other
qualitative researchers, the subject matter - the phenomena to be
observed and described - are the actions, interactions, choices, beliefs
and perspectives of the individuals who live or work in the context or
setting selected for examination. "Researchers who use this approach are
interested in the ways different people make sense out of their lives. .
. . They focus on such questions as: What assumptions do people make
about their lives? What do they take for granted?" (Bogdan & Biklen,
1992, p. 32).

Qualitative researchers argue that the same act (when performed on
different occasions) can have different meanings. "A crucial . . .
distinction in interpretive research is that between *behavior*, the
physical act, and *action*, which is the physical behavior plus the
meaning interpretations held by the actor" (Erickson, 1986, p. 126-127).
As used by ethnographers, the term *action* includes not only the
actions of individuals but also their interactions with others, and it
includes not only physical actions and interactions but also verbal
actions and interactions (such as conversations). The actions and
meanings which are of primary interest are the actions and meanings of
individuals rather than the average actions and meanings of groups of
people. It may be noted that the subject matter of the qualitative
researcher ("action-and-meaning") is similar in a number of respects to
the subject matter of the behaviour analyst ("behaviour-and-purpose").

Interpretive researchers use the terms *meanings* and *interpretations*
to refer to a variety of things: the goal or intention of the actor; the
perspective of the actor; the way in which the actor interprets,
explains, or justifies his or her actions; the actor's beliefs,
attitudes, and understandings with respect to the situation they are a
part of; their understanding of the social rules which govern behaviour
in the setting of interest, and their beliefs with respect to what they
see as the courses of action which are open to them. "Actions . . . can
only be interpreted by reference to the actor\'s motives, intentions or
purposes in performing the action. To identify these motives and
intentions correctly is to grasp the subjective meaning the action has
to the actor" (Carr & Kemmis, 1986, p. 88).

Interpretation of an action involves more than simply identifying the
reason which the actor gives for that action. It also involves
identifying the social norms, rules, and expectations which operate in
the setting in which the action is performed. These norms and rules of
social behaviour are often referred to as the culture of the social
group. "Another task of an \'interpretive\' social science is to uncover
the set of social rules which give point to a certain kind of social
activity" (Carr & Kemmis, 1986, p. 89).

Most qualitative researchers are aware that actions tend to recur with
the passage of time and that the form and course of particular types of
action vary from one occasion to the next, e.g., "Today\'s enactment of
breakfast in a family differs from yesterday\'s" (Erickson, 1986, p.
129). In this they have much in common with behaviour analysts.

Research into learning and teaching has the potential to identify the
kinds of experiences which need to be provided in order for individual
learners to achieve particular kinds of learning outcomes. However, this
subject matter has been, by and large, of little interest to qualitative
researchers.

First, qualitative researchers have been relatively uninterested in
identifying factors which give rise to the actions and the meanings
which they so assiduously describe. For example, qualitative researchers
do not distinguish between purposes and effects and routinely ignore the
effects of engaging in particular classes of action - even although
these effects, more than any other single factor, operate to shape what
people do in particular contexts, their beliefs about what they should
do, and the language which they use to justify what they do. "What
interpretivism neglects is the causal component - the origins of
behaviour as well as its consequences . . . external and social factors
which shape behaviour are ignored" (Clark, 1997, p. 40). Carr and Kemmis
come to much the same conclusion.

The interpretive model neglects questions about the origins, causes and
results of actors adopting certain interpretations of their actions and
social life . . . Social structure, as well as being the product of the
meanings and actions of individuals, itself produces particular
meanings, ensures their continuing existence, and thereby limits the
kinds of actions that it is reasonable for individuals to perform. It is
appropriate, therefore for social science to examine not only the
meanings of particular forms of social action, but also the social
factors that engender and sustain them (Carr & Kemmis, 1986, p. 95).

Secondly, ethnographers are relatively uninterested in questions about
the effects or effectiveness of different teaching practices. "In and of
themselves, ethnographic accounts do not . . . give clues as to what
should be done differently, nor do they suggest how best to proceed. . .
. ethnography does not point out the lessons to be gained or the action
that should be taken" (Wolcott, 1988, p. 203).

Thirdly, ethnography is a descriptive research procedure and a
descriptive procedure cannot be used to identify the factors which are
of greatest interest to teachers and to students of learning, that is,
the factors on which learning depends, the effects of prior experience
on behaviour and beliefs, and the interrelationship between teaching
events and the changes which we refer to as learning. These are
relationships and their identification requires controlled, or
experimental modes of observation.

Most importantly, the ethnographic method was developed to study
particulars and it is for the study of particulars that the method is
primarily used. However, most researchers and almost all practitioners
are interested in generalisations. It is nature\'s general rules which
are of greatest interest to the scientist, and it is the general rules
of effective teaching which are of greatest interest to teachers.
Ethnographic methods cannot generate the kind of knowledge which is
normally sought by students of learning and teaching, that is an
understanding of the factors which influence learning (or which
influence the effects of teaching) across individuals, across contexts,
and across time. The teacher who is interested in generalisations about
what should be done to bring about particular learning outcomes will
find that ethnographic reports are almost always silent on such
questions.
:::

::: referencesList
#### References

-   Bogdan, R. C., & Biklen, S. K. (1992). Qualitative research for
    education: An introduction to theory and methods (2nd ed.). Boston:
    Allyn and Bacon.
-   Carr, W., & Kemmis, S. (1986). Becoming critical: Education,
    knowledge and action research. London: The Falmer Press.
-   Clark, J. (1997). Educational research: Philosophy, politics,
    ethics. Massey University, Palmerston North, NZ: ERDC Press.
-   Erickson, F. (1986). Qualitative methods in research on teaching.
    In M. C. Wittrock (Ed.), Handbook of research on teaching (3rd ed.,
    pp. 119-161). New York: Macmillan.
-   Wolcott, H. F. (1988). Ethnographic research in education. In R. M.
    Jaeger (Ed.), Complementary methods for research in education (pp.
    185-206). Washington, DC: American Educational Research Association.
:::
