---
grand_parent: 'How are the effects of teaching on learning to be measured? '
great_grand_parent: 'Types of research evidence '
great_great_grand_parent: 'Welcome to Teacher Education''s Core Knowledge and Skills.'
has_children: false
layout: default
nav_order: 5
parent: 'Types of questions and the research methods required to answer them '
title: 'Between-groups experiments and within-subject experiments '
---
# Between-groups experiments and within-subject experiments 


::: documentByline
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
:::

::: {#parent-fieldname-text-de02bf82f08b4acaa139b91d2e9a3b91}
In educational and psychological research, two general types of
experiment have evolved. These are (a) the between-groups experiment and
(b) the within-subject experiment.

**Between-groups experiments.** In a between-groups experiment, the
learners are divided into at least two groups, an experimental group and
a control group, and the learners in the experimental group are exposed
to the experimental treatment while the learners in the control group
are not. The effects of the experimental treatment are measured by
comparing the average post-treatment performance of the experimental
subjects against that of the control subjects. Obviously, this kind of
experimental method can only be used where a relatively large number of
students are being exposed to the same teaching procedure.

The main weakness of this procedure as a way of studying learning is
that the individual subjects in each group bring different skills and
capabilities with them to the experiment and, as a consequence, are
differently affected by the experimental treatment. As a result, it is
often impossible to draw, from this kind of experiment, any compelling
conclusions regarding the effects of the experimental treatment on the
learning of the individuals who took part in the experiment.

In addition, the results of this kind of experiment are almost always
reported in terms of changes in the *mean* scores of the learners in
each group. The mean score of a group of learners can improve even when
some of the learners in the group have learned nothing. To conclude that
a given teaching method is more effective than a second method simply
because it has produced a higher *mean* score is a highly problematic
practice because the mean score may be hiding the fact that some
students improved while some did not improve at all.

Generally speaking, the between-groups method is appropriate only where
the researcher is interested in the mean level of performance of a
particular population of learners, as would be the case during a large
scale evaluation of a particular teaching programme, or set of teaching
materials, or type of class (or school) organisation.

**Within-subject experiments.** Within-subject experiments involve the
repeated observation of the performance of individual learners over a
period of time. Treatment effects are measured by comparing the
performance changes observed in the days following the introduction of
the experimental treatment against the same subject\'s performance in
the days prior to the treatment (rather than against the performance of
some control group which has not been exposed to the treatment).

The within-subject experiment avoids many of the problems inherent in
the between-groups experiment. It can be used to measure the effects of
particular teaching procedures on the learning of individual children.
Where several children are involved, this kind of experiment provides
information about the performance changes of each individual child. And
pre-experimental differences between children are removed as possible
causes of experimental effects (because each individual learner
experiences both the "control" treatment and the experimental
treatment).

The within-subject experiment generates information about the
performance changes of individuals. It is, therefore, a more suitable
method for studying learning (which occurs only in individuals) and for
studying the ways in which particular teaching variables influence the
skill development of individual learners. It is also an appropriate
procedure for studying the effects of particular teaching and
therapeutic procedures on the adaptive and maladaptive behaviour of
individuals. Thirdly, the within-subject experimental analysis has
become the research method of choice amongst research scientists who are
seeking to identify functional relationships, that is, the variables
upon which human behaviour and human learning depend.

Within-subject measures of the effects of teaching on learning are a
fairly recent development in educational research and did not begin to
appear in the scientific literature until about 1968. Prior to that time
almost all measures of teaching effects used the between-groups
procedure. Because the within-subject experimental method is relatively
new, it is not always described in research methods textbooks. Because
an understanding of within-subject experimentation is essential
knowledge for teachers, teacher educators and teaching researchers, this
is a very serious omission.
:::
