---
grand_parent: 'How are the effects of teaching on learning to be measured? '
great_grand_parent: 'Types of research evidence '
great_great_grand_parent: 'Welcome to Teacher Education''s Core Knowledge and Skills.'
has_children: false
layout: default
nav_order: 3
parent: 'Types of questions and the research methods required to answer them '
title: 'Descriptive, correlational and experimental procedures '
---
# Descriptive, correlational and experimental procedures 


::: documentByline
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
:::

::: {#parent-fieldname-text-ac89cfcc99ba437480fafd62b49c81c0}
In order to identify relationships between particular kinds of teaching
events and particular types of learning outcomes, we need a research
procedure which is effective in detecting relationships. Not all
research procedures are procedures which can be used to detect
relationships.

**Descriptive procedures.** Descriptive research is research which aims
simply to describe some kind of naturally occurring phenomenon such as
the mathematical skills of children of different ages, or the managerial
skills of teachers, or the attitudes of teachers to a given educational
problem. Descriptive research is a useful mode of inquiry where no-one
knows what is actually happening or where people have conflicting
beliefs about what is happening. But it is not a mode of enquiry which
can be used to identify relationships.

**Correlational procedures.** Correlational research is research which
sets out to identify and describe relationships between naturally
occurring events but without going to the trouble of conducting an
experiment. In a correlational study, nothing is manipulated. There are
no experimental treatments (the participants are not exposed to
different kinds of teaching or different kinds of experiences).
Correlational studies, too, are useful in the early stages of
investigation of a new field of inquiry because they can serve as a rich
source of hypotheses for subsequent experimental studies. However,
correlational studies cannot identify cause-and-effect relationships.
This is because when we observe a correlation between two variables we
can never tell whether variation in the first is causing variation in
the second, whether variation in the second is causing variation in the
first, or whether variation in both is due to variation in some other
variable which we never collected any data on.

**Experimental procedures.** Only experimental studies can identify
cause-and-effect relationships. An experiment is a controlled
observation during which the variable of interest is manipulated so that
its effects can be measured. In a teaching experiment, it is usually
some aspect of teaching or practice which is manipulated so that its
effects on student learning can be measured.

In an experiment, the variable which is manipulated is called the
*independent variable*. In teaching and learning experiments, the
independent variable is usually some kind of instructional variable but
it can be any aspect of the learner\'s experience or any aspect of the
learner\'s interaction with their environment. An experiment measures
the effect of manipulating the independent variable. The measure of
effect is called the *dependent variable*. The measure of effect is
called the dependent variable because the measure which is obtained is
dependent upon what was done to the independent variable during the
experiment. In teaching experiments and learning experiments, the
dependent variable is usually some measure of learning, that is some
measure of change in the behaviour, knowledge, understanding, motivation
or attitude of the learner.

In education and psychology, experiments are used to detect and to
analyse *environment-behaviour* relationships. It is not possible to use
an experimental procedure to study behaviour-behaviour relationships
(because we can't change a person's behaviour without first making some
kind of change to their environment) and it makes no logical sense for
teaching researchers to conduct experiments into environment-environment
relationships (because these provide no information about how our
interaction with the environment affects our learning). In teaching
research, experimental analyses are almost always analyses of
environment-behaviour relationships because the factors which are of
most interest to teachers are the ones which they can do something about
and these factors are *external* to the learner, that is, they involve
the learner's interaction with his or her environment.
:::
