---
grand_parent: '''Welcome to Teacher Education''''s Core Knowledge and Skills.'''
has_children: true
layout: default
nav_order: 2
title: 'Important learning and teaching events '
---
# Important learning and teaching events


```yaml
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
```


Distinctions between the events which do (and do not) affect learning
are absolutely critical if we are to develop a science of learning and
teaching. Little or no progress was made in any of the established
sciences until the "basic units" of the subject matter had been
identified.

The same will be true in our attempts to develop a "science of
learning". Each of the different types of change currently subsumed
under the heading "learning" will need to be identified, defined, and
given an agreed name. Secondly, each of the events which are found to be
a necessary condition for, or to have an affect upon, one of these types
of change will also need to be identified, defined and given an agreed
name. Only if this can be achieved will different groups of researchers
be able to work cooperatively on the task of identifying the conditions
necessary for each different type of learning and to communicate with
each other regarding the results of their many experiments.

In Book 2 we will begin the task of identifying the many distinctions
which appear to be necessary if we are to make any kind of progress in
our attempts to identify the conditions which do and do not affect
learning.

In Chapter 1 we define learning and identify some of the more important
changes which are subsumed under the term "learning".

Chapter 2 lists the kinds of curriculum goals which teachers are
expected to work towards and makes the observation that most of these
are very poorly defined. In Chapter 3 we begin the task of identifying
the important learning outcomes which are hidden inside some of these
curriculum goals.

In Chapter 4 we identify the three-term learning interaction as a basic
unit of analysis and list many of the antecedent events, variations in
practice responses, and consequences (response outcomes) which have been
found, as a result of experimentation, to affect attention, motivation,
and the acquisition and retention of new responses. In Chapter 5, we
list some of the ways in which learning interactions and their component
events can be sequenced by teachers (and learners) in their attempts to
acquire and master new skills and understandings.
