---
grand_parent: 'Approaches to research into learning and teaching '
great_grand_parent: 'Types of research evidence '
great_great_grand_parent: 'Welcome to Teacher Education''s Core Knowledge and Skills.'
has_children: false
layout: default
nav_order: 1
parent: 'What units of analysis are used by the three main approaches to research? '
title: 'The units of analysis employed by behaviour analysts '
---
# The units of analysis employed by behaviour analysts 


::: documentByline
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
:::

::: {#parent-fieldname-text-a76ad6c03e2047aabbcf439359fa2874}
Behaviour analysts consider the selection of an appropriate unit of
analysis to be an extremely important matter and have written at length
regarding the most appropriate units of analysis for a science of
learning (Johnston & Pennypacker, 1993a; Lee, 1995). "In behavior
analysis, as in the other natural sciences, the key to the emergence of
scientific laws has been the discovery of basic units of analysis"
(Schlinger, 1995, p. 34).

Behaviour analysts argue that responses should be grouped together on
the basis of their common purpose or function because behaviour is
adaptive, because responses which are successful in achieving a
particular purpose or outcome are more likely to be used again in the
future than responses which are unsuccessful, and because a
classification in terms of function is more likely to lead to discovery
of the variables which are responsible for behaviour change than a
classification in terms of form, structure, or theoretical conjecture.
"The behavior analyst distinguishes between *movements*, responses
defined by their form or the musculature used, and *actions*, responses
defined by their relations to the environment. We\'ll find that actions
are more important for our purposes. Consider how often we speak of
doing things, going places or manipulating objects, without regard to
the details of how these actions are performed" (Catania, 1998, p. 11).

Behaviour analysts refer to the particular actions in a given response
class as *responses*, and to the antecedents and consequences of those
responses as *stimuli*. "When we observe an organism, we see properties
of its environment and properties of its behavior. We call these
properties *stimuli* and *responses*. But neither a stimulus or a
response is of interest by itself. An experimental analysis determines
what kinds of relations exist between stimuli and responses, and how
these relations can come about" (Catania, 1998, p. 7).

The idea that responses should be grouped together on the basis of their
common purpose or function rather than on the basis of their form,
structure, developmental progression, or value as evidence of some
theoretical construct was first suggested by B.F. Skinner. "He defined
stimuli and responses (i.e. environment and behavior), not as
independent structural units, but as functional classes. Thus stimuli
were not defined by their physical energy, and responses were not
defined by their form or topography. Rather both were defined by their
respective effects on one another" (Schlinger, 1995, p. 34).

Behaviour analysts argue that a functional classification is preferable
to a classification based on topography, form, or structure because two
seemingly similar behaviours may serve quite different purposes, that
is, similar looking behaviours may be the result of quite different
environmental variables. "Typically, we assign a particular act to a
functional class on the basis of both its effect and its context. . . .
We may consider \'compliance with a threat\' an operant because its
members occur in a certain context (a \'threat\') and have historically
had a certain effect (removal of the threat). Handing my wallet to my
wife for her to remove money is a different operant from handing my
wallet to a mugger" (Baum, 1994, p. 77).

The behaviour analyst argues that the distinction between functionally
and structurally defined response classes is fundamental. For the
behaviour analyst, the aim of scientific analysis is to detect and
describe those relationships between behaviour and its context which
exist in nature. This cannot be achieved if the investigator selects
(for study) groupings of responses (such as those suggested by the
concepts of natural language, or the constructs of the social scientist)
which include responses from a number of different functional classes
each of which has been learned as a result of a different set of
experiences and each of which is under the control of a different set of
antecedents and/or consequences.

Behaviour analysts take the same approach to the analysis of the
environment. In contrast to the social scientist who might classify
environments in terms of "household income" or "parenting style", the
behaviour analyst classifies environments at the level of particular
interactions. Environmental events are also classified according to
function (not form or structure). "For behavior analysts, the
environment is not defined prior to the study of behavior or by what it
looks like, but rather after functional relations have been established,
that is, by how it functions" (Schlinger, 1995, p. 36). An environmental
event comes to be defined as a stimulus only when it has been found to
affect the responses in a particular class of responses in a consistent
and predictable manner.

Behaviour analysts distinguish between several different classes of
behaviour-environment relationships.

**1. Respondents.** The simplest of these is a class of
environment-behaviour relationships which the behaviour analyst refers
to as *respondents*. Observation of a respondent relationship involves
observation of the reflex response which is of interest (e.g., the
startle reflex) and the particular antecedent stimuli which elicit the
reflex (e.g., a sudden loud noise).

**2. Operants***.* Next in order of complexity is a class of
behaviour-environment relationships which behaviour analysts refer to as
*operants.* Observation of an operant relationship involves observation
of the responses which are of interest and the common purpose which they
serve (that is, the outcome or consequence which their performance
generates). Behaviour analysts distinguish between a number of different
kinds of operant relationships: those which make the responses in a
given response class more likely to be used again in the future (the
positive reinforcement, negative reinforcement, and recovery
relationships), and those which make the continued use of a given class
of responses less likely in the future (the positive punishment,
negative punishment, and extinction relationships).

**3. Three-term contingencies.** Thirdly, behaviour analysts study a
class of environment-behaviour-environment relationships which they
refer to as *discriminated operants* or as *three term contingencies*.
Observation of a discriminated operant involves observation of the
antecedent stimulus which consistently evokes the response, the response
itself, and the consequence which results when the antecedent stimulus
is responded to in this way. Each of the following S-\>R-\>S sequences
(repeated as time passes) are examples of discriminated operants:

-   the phone rings--\> I answer it --\> and a conversation (usually)
    follows,
-   an example of a particular kind of maths problem is presented -\>
    the student says or writes an answer -\> the teacher provides
    feedback regarding the adequacy of the answer.

**4. Four-term contingencies.** Fourthly, behaviour analysts study
conditional discriminations or *four term contingencies*. A conditional
discrimination is one in which responses to examples of a particular
class of stimuli have one kind of outcome in one context but a different
kind of outcome in another context. The following is an example of a
conditional discrimination. The teacher displays a 4 cm stick and an 8
cm stick and asks "Which one is longer?", the child points to the 8 cm
stick, and the teacher says "Yes". Then the teacher displays an 8 cm
stick and a 12 cm stick and asks "Which one is longer?", the child
points to the 8 cm stick, and the teacher says "No." In this case (the
conditional discrimination *longer*), selection of the 8 cm stick may be
either a correct response or an incorrect response depending upon the
context (the length of the second or comparison stick).

Unlike the qualitative researcher who groups events into the categories
of everyday language, or the social scientist who groups behaviours
according to topography or form, the behaviour analyst classifies
environment-behaviour *relationships* and classifies these relationships
according to *function*. For example, behaviour-consequence
relationships which function to increase the probability of occurrence
of behaviour (motivate the continued use of behaviour) are grouped
together under the heading *reinforcement contingencies*. This procedure
has been found to have a number of advantages.

First, it has resulted in a taxonomy which consists of a relatively
small number of relatively well defined classes of environment-behaviour
relationships. See, for example, the glossary in Catania (1998). Of
course, this taxonomy is constantly evolving. During the past 40 years,
new relationships have been added, and the definitions of existing
relationships have been adjusted to bring the distinctions which are
being made into line with new research findings.

Secondly, it means that the behaviour analysis research community has a
procedure for deciding whether or not a new category term should be
added to the existing taxonomy. Only when a group of researchers have
demonstrated that they have isolated a new environment-behaviour
relationship do they win the right to add a new category term to the
existing taxonomy. Most recently this has occurred with respect to the
term *equivalence relations* (and their defining features of
reflexivity, symmetry, and transitivity) during oral and written
language learning (Sidman, 1994).

Thirdly, it means that all behaviour analysts are describing the results
of their investigations in a common (albeit technical) language. As a
consequence, each behaviour analysis research report is immediately
comprehensible to the entire behaviour analysis research community and
the results of each investigation are directly comparable with the
results of the great majority of the investigations which have preceded
it.

Fourthly, particular environment-behaviour relationships, once they have
been identified, tend to be the focus of many hundreds of further
experiments designed to explore the generality of the presumed
relationship, its technical applications, and so on. See, for example,
the replication history described by Barlow and Hersen (1984) for the
operation *differential attention*. As a result of the differential
attention research, it is now possible to predict (with more accuracy
than previously) the conditions under which differential attention will
and will not function to motivate behaviour change in children.

The development of a taxonomy of environment-behaviour relationships
each with its own technical name is not without its disadvantages. For
example, it means that reports of behaviour analysis research are not
immediately comprehensible to readers with no training in the language
of behaviour analysis. One of the first things which the student of
behaviour analysis discovers is that there is a technical vocabulary to
be mastered. It takes some "study and practice to learn to talk about
behavior in proper scientific terminology, just as it takes years of
study in other natural sciences to talk fluently about other natural
phenomena" (Johnston & Pennypacker, 1993a, p. 32).

Behaviour analysts are sometimes criticised for using the specialised
descriptive language which they have developed. Heward and Cooper (1992,
p. 454) note, however, that "we do not expect an atomic physicist or
botanist to give up his or her technical vocabulary when engaging in
scientific description or dialogue, so why should we do so when human
behavior is the subject of scientific discussion?"
:::

::: referencesList
#### References

-   Barlow, D. H., & Hersen, M. (1984). Single case experimental
    designs: Strategies for studying behavior change (2nd ed.). New
    York: Pergamon.
-   Baum, W. M. (1994). Understanding behaviorism: Science, behavior and
    culture. New York: HarperCollins College Publishers.
-   Catania, A. C. (1998). Learning (4th ed.). New York: Prentice Hall.
-   Heward, W. L., & Cooper, J. O. (1992). Radical behaviorism: A
    productive and needed philosophy for education. Journal of
    Behavioral Education, 2, 345-365.
-   Johnston, J. M., & Pennypacker, H. S. (1993a). Strategies and
    tactics of behavioral research (2nd ed.). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
    Erlbaum Associates.
-   Lee, V. L. (1995). What is a psychological unit? Behaviour Change,
    12, 98-108.
-   Rosenberg, A. (1995). Philosophy of social science (2nd ed.).
    Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
-   Schlinger, H. D. (1995). A behavior analytic view of child
    development. New York: Plenum Press.
-   Sidman, M. (1994). Equivalence relations and behavior: A research
    story. Boston: Authors Cooperative.
:::
