---
has_children: false
layout: default
nav_order: 4
title: 'Learned reinforcers '
---
# Learned reinforcers 


::: documentByline
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
:::

::: {#parent-fieldname-text-44e3f83033854903b53edea9bc1a2736}
Learned reinforcers are those environmental events which acquire their
reinforcing properties as a result of experience (usually the experience
of occurring in association with events which already function as
reinforcers). The learned reinforcers include the socially mediated
encouragements, commendations, prizes, rewards, favours and so on which
the members of a given social group use in their attempts to encourage
culturally approved (rather than antisocial) behaviour in others. The
socially mediated reinforcers play a very important role not only in
learning but also in the maintenance of society. Much economic activity
and all paid work, for example, is maintained by systems of learned
reinforcers - the reinforcers which we refer to as money.

Many of the learned reinforcers are consequences which are provided by
or mediated by other people. All learned reinforcers are *culturally
relative*. A particular phrase which functions as a commendation and
hence as a reinforcer in one culture may have no meaning and hence no
reinforcing properties outside that culture. In Western cultures it is
considered appropriate to praise younger children for responding
correctly. In many Asian cultures it is considered inappropriate to
praise children simply for responding correctly because this may make
them "conceited". One of the reasons why teachers must know the cultural
background of each of the children their classes is because this
information is needed in order to make decisions about the kinds of
events which are likely to function as social reinforcers for individual
children.

Because learned reinforcers acquire their reinforcing properties as a
result of experience, the events which will function as learned
reinforcers for individual children *change with age*. Money does not
function as a reinforcer for very young children. It only acquires
reinforcing properties after the child has the opportunity to learn that
money can be exchanged for other things which do have reinforcing
properties.

At any given age, the events which will function as learned reinforcers
also *vary from one child to the next* as a result of differences in the
learning histories of individual children. Some children, for example,
do not find feedback reinforcing. In fact, some children (especially
those who have been raised by very inconsistent parents) do not even
find praise reinforcing. These individual differences in responsiveness
to events which often function as learned reinforcers need must be
understood and taken into account if one is to become a teacher.

Because almost any event which regularly occurs in association with
reinforcing events can acquire reinforcing properties, the number of
different kinds of events which acquire reinforcing properties during
the development of the individual is quite large. An understanding of
the wide range of different kinds of events which can function as
reinforcing consequences is essential knowledge for teachers and
teaching researchers because any event which functions as a reinforcing
event has the power to shape improvements in performance, to raise
motivation, and to create a liking for particular people and activities.
We may group the most commonly occurring learned reinforcers into three
general categories: access to preferred activities, the positive
reactions of others and positive feedback.

**Access to activities which already generate reinforcement (Premack's
Rule)**

Behaviours which the learner can already perform and which already
generate reinforcement are usually referred to as *high probability
behaviours.* They may also be referred to as preferred activities,
because they are activities which, if the learner is given a choice, he
or she will choose to engage in. During the 1950s the behavioural
scientist, David Premack, demonstrated that any activity which the
learner preferred to engage in can be used to reinforce completion of
any less preferred task (Premack, 1959). If a particular child prefers
watching TV to completing homework after school, and the parent
introduces the requirement "In order to watch TV (consequence) you must
first complete your homework (target behaviour)" then many children will
begin to complete their homework in order to maintain access to the TV
and the reinforcement which it provides. This general principle has come
to be known as "Premack\'s Rule".

Premack\'s rule identifies any activity which the learner chooses to
engage in (in preference to completing the target behaviour) as a
potential reinforcer. Premack\'s rule identifies a very large number of
reinforcers for each learner and does so for all learners regardless of
age, level of ability, or cultural background.

Of course, the particular activities which are preferred by individuals
(and which will function as reinforcers for particular individuals) vary
from one individual to the next as a function of their different
learning histories. Some people will work hard to earn the opportunity
to attend a football match. Other people do not find the opportunity to
attend football matches at all reinforcing.

However, there is enough commonality in the learning histories of
children to result in certain activities becoming preferred activities
for large numbers of children. Sulzer-Azaroff and Mayer (1991, p.
156-157), for example have listed a number of activities which are "high
probability behaviours" (and which will function as reinforcers) for
many children. These include:

listening to a taped story

using gym equipment

watching TV

tape-recording oneself

playing with puppets

using a computer

sitting with a friend in class

working the photocopier

listening to music

modelling with modelling clay

using items of science equipment

winning first choice of playground equipment

looking at slides

drawing on the blackboard

sitting at the teacher\'s desk

solving codes and puzzles

running errands

reading an interesting book

playing with blocks

using a typewriter

feeding the fish

playing games like noughts and crosses

having lunch with the teacher

passing out books in the classroom

colouring pictures

tutoring another child

painting

helping staff

watching cartoons

using the woodwork room

playtime

working with a friend

reading magazines

playing playground games

playing board games

stapling

One characteristic of skilled performance is that it enables the learner
to gain access to other reinforcing activities - activities which
hitherto were inaccessible. The outcome to a child of learning to ride a
bike is the additional, new reinforcing activities (such as attending
football matches) which become accessible once one has learned how to
ride a bike. It is this kind of outcome which often motivates people to
practise, and eventually to master, new skills.

**The positive reactions of others**

Social interaction, of a positive kind, acquires reinforcing properties
early in the life of most children. This is partly because of the
sensory stimulation which social interaction provides, but also because
access to so many reinforcers is mediated by the other people in the
child\'s environment. Some examples of the kinds of social reactions
(social consequences) which often function as reinforcers in Western
style cultures are as follows.

-   *Social interaction*. For example, continued conversation, having
    one\'s question answered, having one\'s request granted, receiving
    the help which has been requested
-   *Attention*. For example, nod, smile, wink, pat on the shoulder (in
    some cultures)
-   *Agreement*. For example, "Yes I agree", "Yes I think you should",
    "Okay"
-   *Thanks*. For example, "That\'s very good of you", "Thank you", "How
    considerate"
-   *Praise*. For example, "I like that", "See how you have improved",
    "That is better than yesterday", "Much better", "Good work", "You
    did that well", "You are doing very well", "Wow", "Far out",
    "That\'s the way", "That\'s right", "That\'s good", "That\'s great",
    "That\'s excellent", "That\'s perfect", "That\'s the best job I\'ve
    seen today"
-   *Descriptive praise*. For example, "I like the way you have set that
    out", "You have got every single one correct - Excellent", "Not a
    single spelling error - Great", "This is very neat indeed"
-   *Public commendation*. For example, "You should show this to your
    parents", "Look what \_\_ has done", "Show the class your \_\_", "I
    think you should put this on the wall", "I\'m going to give you a
    \_\_ for this"
-   *Merit awards*. For example, certificate of achievement, letter of
    merit to parent, name or photo on merit board, best performer award,
    points towards a prize, a prize for achievement
-   *Rewards*. For example, pens, pencils, felts, crayons, rubbers,
    notebooks, coloured paper, stickers, cards, badges, gold stars

**Positive feedback**

*Feedback is the term most commonly used to refer to consequences which
have the effect of informing the learner whether or not their practice
response was correct or incorrect*. Feedback may also function to tell
the learner whether or not their most recent performance constituted an
improvement and it may function to tell the learner how close they have
come to the goal of competent performance. We will refer to this kind of
consequence as "positive feedback" or as "confirmation" (because it
confirms that the preceding answer is correct or an improvement over
previous attempts).

In Western societies feedback which informs the learner that their
performance was correct, or satisfactory, or improved, or closer to the
target which they have set, often functions as a reinforcing
consequence - motivating continued practice and continued improvement.

The approving reactions of others often have a feedback component. But
feedback can also be provided independently of the reactions of others.
In handwriting, for example, feedback can be provided by providing the
learner with models of correctly formed letters for the child to compare
their own handwriting against. Cards containing the answers to worksheet
questions and exercises can be made available for the learner to compare
their own answers against. Responses to exercises and classroom
activities can be marked as correct or incorrect without, necessarily,
praising the correct responses.

The feedback which is provided by others during the course of social
interactions is often quite subtle. If a 2-year old child says something
which is not understood by, say, his mother, he will not normally be
told that his utterance is "wrong", he will be asked to repeat it. In
this situation, then, "conversation proceeding" is the feedback event
which indicates that the previous response was satisfactory and "being
asked to say something again" is the feedback event which indicates that
the previous response was unsatisfactory.

A similar operation occurs during question-and-answer discussions in the
classroom. The student who frames an incorrect answer during a classroom
discussion will often not be told that the answer is unsatisfactory.
Rather the teacher will ask another child what she thinks. In this
situation then, "lesson proceeding" is the feedback event which
indicates that the previous answer was acceptable to the teacher and
"question redirected to another student" is the feedback event which
indicates that the previous answer was less than satisfactory.
:::

::: referencesList
#### References

-   Premack, D. (1959). Toward empirical behavior laws: I. Positive
    reinforcement. Psychological Review, 66, 219-233.
-   Sulzer-Azaroff, B. & Mayer, G.R. (1991) Behavior analysis for
    lasting change. Fort Worth, TX: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
:::
