---
has_children: false
layout: default
nav_order: 5
title: 'Level of response control '
---
# Level of response control 


::: documentByline
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
:::

::: {#parent-fieldname-text-e3f16443c1cf4b468ff710c522a9d852}
Prompts can vary with respect to their effectiveness. In technical terms
we say that prompts vary with respect to the degree of control which
they have over the desired response. I can provide a demonstration of
how to solve a particular type of maths problem and this may function as
an effective prompt for some children and as an ineffective prompt for
other children. An "ineffective prompt" is, of course, not a prompt at
all because an "ineffective prompt" has no effect on the learner's
performance or learning.

The effectiveness of a particular prompt for a particular child lies
somewhere on a continuum from highly effective through to barely
effective. One way of distinguishing between more and less effective
prompts is to talk in terms of strong prompts and weak prompts.

**Strong prompts***.* Effective prompts are often referred to as strong
prompts (because they provide a high degree of control over the
learner's response and make correct responding highly likely). *A strong
prompt is one which, if presented, makes it highly likely that the
learner will respond with the prompted response*. If a child comes to a
reading word which they do not recognise and the teacher says the word
and the child then imitates the word, "saying the word" has functioned
as a strong prompt. Strong prompts not only make performance of the
correct response highly likely, they also make errors very unlikely.
They therefore have an important role to play during the initial
learning phase.

**Weak prompts.** A weak prompt is a prompt which, while still providing
assistance, provides less assistance than a strong prompt. *A weak
prompt is a prompt which, if presented, increases the likelihood that
the learner will respond correctly but which does not increase this
likelihood as much as a strong prompt would*. If a child comes to a
reading word which they do not recognise and the teacher says "What is
the first sound?" and the child decodes the word step by step, then
"What is the first sound?" has functioned as a weaker prompt than simply
saying the word for the child to imitate. It is a weaker prompt because
the child has had to do more work in figuring out the correct response.
Weak prompts, while reducing the likelihood of learner error, leave more
room for errors to be made than is the case with strong prompts. Weak
prompts are of little use during the initial phase of learning (when the
child has yet to learn how to respond correctly) but they have an
important role to play during the transition from prompted to unprompted
(independent) performance.
:::
