# Three types of relationships \n

::: documentByline
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
:::

::: {#parent-fieldname-text-be77e4d14ce446dcb29bc2c9f5349be2}
Questions about relationship may be questions about differing kinds of
relationships. Consider the following questions:

1."If a child is receiving large numbers of negative remarks from the
teacher, does that mean that they are also receiving few positive
remarks?"

2."Do students complete more work in class when they receive frequent
positive remarks from teachers?"

3."Do students who frequently volunteer answers during the course of a
lesson achieve higher scores on subsequent tests of lesson content?"

In the first case, the child is the "subject" (because it is they who
are experiencing the remarks). The remarks are *external* to the child.
They are part of the child's *experience*. They are part of the child's
learning environment*.* Both the positive and negative remarks are
external to the students. So the first question is a question about an
*environment-environment* relationship. It is the relationship between
two classes of environmental variables (positive and negative teacher
remarks) which is of interest.

In the second case, completing work is a student *behaviour*, and
positive remarks from teachers are external to the student. They are an
aspect of the students' learning *environment.* So the second question
is a question about an *environment-behaviour* relationship. It is the
relationship between an aspect of the learner\'s environment, and a
particular aspect of the learner\'s behaviour which is of interest.
Environment-behaviour relationships are of particular interest to
teachers because teachers have a responsibility to help children master
new behaviours, skills and understandings and are, therefore, very
interested in the environmental arrangements which need to be provided
in order to bring about these improvements in competence.

In the third case, the students are the subjects and the relationship
which is of interest is a *behaviour-behaviour* relationship. The
investigator wants to know if there is a relationship between
"volunteering answers" (Behaviour 1) and "completing test questions
correctly" (Behaviour 2). Correlational studies of behaviour-behaviour
relationships are very common in the educational research literature.
Many thousands of published studies in education have sought to discover
the size of the correlation between such behaviours as scores on IQ
tests, scores on different kinds of achievement tests, scores on
retention tests, performance on self-esteem measures, performance on
locus of control inventories, performance on learning styles
questionnaires, measures of motivation, and so on.
:::
