---
grand_parent: 'The conditions upon which learning depends '
great_great_grand_parent: 'Welcome to Teacher Education''s Core Knowledge and Skills.'
has_children: true
layout: default
nav_order: 1
parent: 'Motivational processes '
title: 'How motivation and persistence develop '
---
# How motivation and persistence develop


```yaml
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
```


Traditionally it was thought that motivation was primarily a function of
the tasks which learners were being asked to perform. This led to what
turned out to be a fruitless search for the task characteristics which
fostered "motivation". These discussions tended to focus in on task
characteristics such as task relevance, authenticity, interest level,
difficulty level, and so on. Research into the effects of interest and
interestingness continues to the present.

Following the discovery of the role of contingencies of reinforcement
and punishment as determinants of future behaviour during the first half
of the 20th century, a very large number of experimental analyses of
contingencies of reinforcement and punishment and their effects on
productivity, effort and persistence were undertaken during the second
half of the 20th century. The research base for the effects of different
types of contingencies and schedules of reinforcement and punishment is
now larger than that for any other aspect of human learning and consists
of many hundreds of well controlled experimental analyses.

The research base for contingency effects is so large and the
conclusions from this research so compelling that several chapters are
always devoted to this research in modern, scientifically oriented text
books on learning (e.g., Alberto & Troutman, 2009; Malott, Whaley &
Malott, 1993; Miltenberger, 2004; Sulzer-Azaroff & Mayer, 1991). As a
result of these analyses we now have a very clear idea of the way in
which motivation and persistence develop and of the conditions necessary
for both motivation and persistence.

What is now known is that the major determinants of motivation are the
consequences experienced by the learner when they engage in particular
activities (including the consequences which have been experienced while
engaged in that activity in the past). The tendency to engage in a
particular behaviour under certain circumstances is motivated by both
positive reinforcement and by negative reinforcement contingencies. The
tendency not to engage in a particular behaviour under certain
circumstances is motivated by aversive consequences in the form of both
positive punishment and negative punishment contingencies.

Changes in motivation occur over time because repeated performance of a
particular class of responses results in a sequence of consequences from
one response opportunity to the next. Over time, the consequences which
result from working on a particular task may be primarily reinforcing
(in which case motivation to continue working on that task will be
high), the consequences may be predominantly aversive (in which
motivation will be low or non-existent), or the consequences may
sometimes be reinforcing and sometimes aversive (in which case
motivation will fluctuate because the reinforcement generated by task
completion is variable).


#### References

-   Alberto, P. A., & Troutman, A. C. (2009). Applied behavior analysis
    for teachers (8th ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
-   Malott, R. W., Whaley, D. L., & Malott, M. E. (1993). Elementary
    principles of behavior (2nd ed.). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice
    Hall.
-   Miltenberger, R. G. (2004). Behavior modification: Principles and
    procedures (3rd ed.). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth/Thomson Learning.
-   Sulzer-Azaroff, B., & Mayer, G. R. (1991) Behavior analysis for
    lasting change. Fort Worth, TX: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
