---
grand_parent: 'Motivational processes '
great_grand_parent: 'The conditions upon which learning depends '
great_great_grand_parent: 'Teacher Education''s Core Knowledge and Skills.'
has_children: false
layout: default
nav_order: 1
parent: 'How motivation and persistence develop '
title: 'Necessary condition 1. The matching law for positive reinforcement '
---
# Necessary condition 1. The matching law for positive reinforcement


```yaml
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
```


Most classroom learning tasks generate a mixture of positively
reinforcing consequences and aversive consequences for the learner.
Under these circumstances, student motivation (the degree of effort
which the student puts into the task) can be predicted from the Matching
Law (Herrnstein, 1961). "The matching law states that an individual will
distribute his or her behavior between alternatives in the same ratio
that reinforcements have been obtained for these alternatives" (Meyerson
& Hale, 1984, p. 367).

While the Matching Law was first observed in the laboratory, it has been
demonstrated on a number of occasions to apply in the classroom setting
as well. A number of applied experiments have demonstrated that when
students are given a choice between two learning tasks each of which
generates a differing rate of reinforcement, they distribute their time
between these tasks in proportion to the rate of reinforcement provided
for these tasks (e.g., Martens, Lochner & Kelly, 1992; Mace, Neef, Shade
& Mauro, 2996; Neef, Mace, Shea & Shade, 1992). It can be seen
therefore, that the motivation to engage in a particular activity
depends primarily on the reinforcement generated by that activity on
previous occasions (e.g., Simon, Ayllon & Millan, 1982; Zanolli &
Daggett, 1998).

In other words, there is a single essential condition on which
motivation, productivity, and persistence depends and that is the level
of reinforcement previously experienced while engaged in tasks similar
to the present task. Children who have experienced success and other
kinds of reinforcing outcomes while engaged in tasks similar to the
current task will be highly motivated to complete the task. Children who
have experienced less reinforcement while engaged in this type of task
will be less motivated to complete the task.

The research base for this general rule is extensive. The motivating
effect of positive reinforcement on future performance has been
demonstrated for preschoolers (e.g., Barton, 1981; Miller & Schneider,
1970), primary school students (e.g., Chadwick & Day, 1971; Kazdin,
1973) and secondary level students (e.g., LaNunziata, Hill & Krause,
1981; Reese, Murphy & Filipczac, 1981). It has been demonstrated for
normally developing students (e.g. Drew, Evans, Bostow & Drash, 1982;
Kazdin, 1973), students with severe behaviour problems (e.g., Bailey,
Wolf & Phillips, 1970; LaNunziata, et al., 1981), students with learning
disabilities (e.g., Fontenelle & Holliman, 1983; Maag, Rutherford &
DiGangi, 1992), hearing impaired students (Simon et al., 1982), and
students with intellectual disabilities (e.g., Kazdin & Geesey, 1980;
Mayhew & Anderson, 1980).

The effects of reinforcement on motivation have been demonstrated across
a variety of different types of classroom tasks including cooperative
group activities (e.g. Greenwood, Hops, Delquadri & Guild, 1974), whole
class activities (e.g., Chadwick & Day, 1971), maths activities (e.g.,
Marholin & Steinman, 1977; McLaughlin & Malaby, 1975b), reading
activities (e.g., Hamblin & Hamblin, 1972; Swanson, 1981), spelling
activities (e.g., Kastelen, Nickel & McLaughlin, 1984), writing
activities (e.g., Scriven & Glynn, 1983), note taking activities
(McLaughlin & Malaby, 1975a), and social learning activities (e.g.,
Sawyer, Luiselli, Ricciardi & Gower, 2005; Zanolli, Paden & Cox, 1997).

The relationship between positive reinforcement and motivation has been
demonstrated across a wide variety of reinforcing contingencies
including those in which student effort results in feedback (e.g.
Greenwood et al., 1974), in teacher praise (e.g., Fontenelle & Holliman,
1983; Maag et al., 1992; Yawkey, 1971), in peer praise (e.g., Greer &
Polirstok, 1982), in free time (e.g. Simmons & Wasik, 1976), in
contingent access to preferred activities (e.g., Glynn & Thomas, 1974;
Konarski, Johnson, Crowell & Whitman, 1980), in small rewards (e.g.,
Winett, Richards, Krasner & Krasner, 1971; Zanolli et al., 1997), in
reports to parents (e.g., Drew et al., 1982), in selected home
privileges (e.g., Bailey et al., 1970; McKenzie, Clark, Wolf, Kothera &
Benson, 1968), in performance feedback systems (e.g., Kastelen, et al.,
1984), and in token reinforcement systems (e.g., Kazdin, 1973; Libb,
Sachs & Boyd, 1973).

This research base has been reviewed several times. In their 1981
review, Lysakowski and Walberg concluded that reinforcement variables
have a stronger effect on learning and motivation than almost any other
variable apart from practice itself. They further concluded that:
\"Contrary to previous theory and opinions, the strong effects of
instructional reinforcement appear constant across grades (kindergarten
through college), socio-economic levels, race, private and public
schools, and community types\" (Lysakowski & Walberg, 1981, p. 69).


#### References

-   Bailey, J. S., Wolf, M. M., & Phillips, E. L. (1970). Home-based
    reinforcement and the modification of pre-delinquents' classroom
    behavior. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 3, 223-233.
-   Barton, E. J. (1981). Developing sharing: An analysis of modeling
    and other behavioral techniques. Behavior Modification, 5, 386-398.
-   Chadwick, B. A., & Day, R. C. (1971). Systematic reinforcement:
    Academic performance of underachieving students. Journal of Applied
    Behavior Analysis, 4, 311-319.
-   Drew, B. M., Evans, J. H., Bostow, G. G., & Drash, P. W. (1982).
    Increasing assignment completion and accuracy using a daily report
    card procedure. Psychology in the Schools, 19, 540-547.
-   Fontenelle, S., & Holliman, W. (1983). Social management techniques
    for classroom teachers. Psychological Reports, 52, 815-818.
-   Glynn, E. L., & Thomas, J. D. (1974). Effect of cueing on
    self-control of classroom behavior. Journal of Applied Behavior
    Analysis, 7, 299-306.
-   Greenwood, C. R., Hops, H., Delquadri, J., & Guild, J. (1974). Group
    contingencies for group consequences in classroom management: A
    further analysis. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 7, 413-425.
-   Greer, R. D., & Polirstok, S. R. (1982). Collateral gains and
    short-term maintenance in reading and on-task responses by
    inner-city adolescents as a function of their use of social
    reinforcement while tutoring. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis,
    15, 123-139.
-   Hamblin, J. A., & Hamblin, R. L. (1972). On teaching disadvantaged
    preschoolers to read: A successful experiment. American Educational
    Research Journal, 9, 209-216.
-   Herrnstein, R. J. (1961). Relative and absolute strength of response
    as a function of frequency of reinforcement. Journal of the
    Experimental Analysis of Behavior, 4, 267-272.
-   Kastelen, L., Nickel, M., & McLaughlin, T. F. (1984). A performance
    feedback system: Generalization of effects across tasks and time
    with eighth-grade English students. Education & Treatment of
    Children, 7, 141-155.
-   Kazdin, A. E. (1973). Role of instructions and reinforcement in
    behavior changes in token reinforcement programs. Journal of
    Educational Psychology, 64, 63-71.
-   Kazdin, A. E., & Geesey, S. (1980). Enhancing classroom
    attentiveness by preselection of back-up reinforcers in a token
    economy. Behavior Modification, 4, 98-114.
-   Konarski, E. A., Johnson, M. R., Crowell, C. R., & Whitman, T. L.
    (1980). Response deprivation and reinforcement in applied settings:
    A preliminary analysis. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 13,
    595-609.
-   LaNunziata, L. J., Hill, D. S., & Krause, L. A. (1981). Teaching
    social skills in classrooms for behaviorally disordered students.
    Behavioral Disorders, 6, 238-246.
-   Libb, J. W., Sachs, C., & Boyd, W. (1973). Reinforcement strategies
    for token economies in a special classroom setting. Psychological
    Reports, 32, 831-834.
-   Lysakowski, R. S., & Walberg, H. J. (1981). Classroom reinforcement
    and learning: A quantitative synthesis. Journal of Educational
    Research, 75, 69-77.
-   Maag, J. W., Rutherford, R. B., & DiGangi, S. A. (1992). Effects of
    self-monitoring and contingent reinforcement on on-task behavior and
    academic productivity of learning-disabled students: A social
    validation study. Psychology in the Schools, 29, 157-172.
-   Mace, F. C., Neef, N. A., Shade, D., & Mauro, B. C. (1996). Effects
    of problem difficulty and reinforcer quality on time allocated to
    concurrent arithmetic problems. Journal of Applied Behavior
    Analysis, 29, 11-24.
-   Marholin, D., & Steinman, W. M. (1977). Stimulus control in the
    classroom as a function of the behavior reinforced. Journal of
    Applied Behavior Analysis, 10, 465-478.
-   Martens, B. K., Lochner, D. G., & Kelly, S. Q. (1992). The effects
    of variable-interval reinforcement on academic engagement: A
    demonstration of matching theory. Journal of Applied Behavior
    Analysis, 25, 143-151.
-   Mayhew, G. L., & Anderson, J. (1980). Delayed and immediate
    reinforcement: Retarded adolescents in an educational setting.
    Behavior Modification, 4, 527-545.
-   McKenzie, H. S., Clark, M., Wolf, M. M., Kothera, R., & Benson, C.
    (1968). Behavior modification of children with learning disabilities
    using grades as tokens and allowances as back up reinforcers.
    Exceptional Children, 34, 745-752.
-   McLaughlin, T. F., & Malaby, J. E. (1975a). Increasing and
    maintaining note-taking behavior in a sixth grade token classroom:
    An analysis of consequences presented in a delayed manner.
    Psychology: A Journal of Human Behavior, 12, 15-23.
-   McLaughlin, T. F., & Malaby, J. E. (1975b). The effects of various
    token reinforcement contingencies on assignment completion and
    accuracy during variable and fixed token exchange schedules.
    Canadian Journal of Behavioural Science, 7, 411-419.
-   Meyerson, J., & Hale, S. (1984). Practical implications of the
    matching law. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 17, 367-380.
-   Miller, L. K., & Schneider, R. (1970). The use of a token system in
    Project Head Start. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 3,
    213-220.
-   Neef, N. A., Mace, F. C., Shea, M. C., & Shade, D. (1992). Effects
    of reinforcer rate and reinforcer quality on time allocation:
    Extension of matching theory to educational settings. Journal of
    Applied Behavior Analysis, 25, 691-699.
-   Reese, S. C., Murphy, R. J., & Filipczak, J. (1981). Assessment of
    multiple behavioral procedures on academic and social classroom
    behavior. Psychology in the Schools, 18, 349-355.
-   Sawyer, L. M., Luiselli, J. K., Ricciardi, J. N., & Gower, J. L.
    (2005). Teaching a child with autism to share among peers in an
    integrated preschool classroom: Acquisition, maintenance, and social
    validation. Education and Treatment of Children, 28, 1-10.
-   Scriven, J., & Glynn, T. (1983). Performance feedback on written
    tasks for low-achieving secondary students. New Zealand Journal of
    Educational Studies, 18, 134-145.
-   Simmons, J. T., & Wasik, B. H. (1976). Grouping strategies, peer
    influence, and free time as classroom management techniques with
    first- and third-grade children. Journal of School Psychology, 14,
    322-332 .
-   Simon, S. J., Ayllon, T., & Milan, M. A. (1982). Behavioral
    compensation: Contrast like effects in the classroom. Behavior
    Modification, 6, 407-420.
-   Swanson, L. (1981). Modification of comprehension deficits in
    learning disabled children. Learning Disability Quarterly, 4,
    189-202.
-   Winett, R. A., Richards, C. S., Krasner, L., & Krasner, M. (1971).
    Child-monitored token reading program. Psychology in the Schools, 8,
    259-262.
-   Yawkey, T. D. (1971). Conditioning independent work behavior in
    reading with seven-year-old children in a regular early childhood
    classroom. Child Study Journal, 2, 23-34.
-   Zanolli, K., & Daggett, J. (1998). The effects of reinforcement rate
    on the spontaneous social initiations of socially withdrawn
    preschoolers. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 31, 117-125.
-   Zanolli, K.M., Paden, P., & Cox, K. (1997). Teaching prosocial
    behavior to typically developing toddlers. Journal of Behavioral
    Education, 7, 373-391.
