---
great_grand_parent: '''Welcome to Teacher Education''''s Core Knowledge and Skills.'''
has_children: true
layout: default
nav_order: 3
parent: 'Types of research evidence '
title: 'How are the effects of teaching on learning to be measured? '
---
# How are the effects of teaching on learning to be measured?


```yaml
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
```


Once the learning researcher or teaching researcher has developed an
accurate and reproducible measure of learning it becomes possible to
seek the answer to many interesting questions. For example learning
researchers may seek the answer to questions such as "What are the
conditions which must be provided in order for students with achievement
level "z" to learn and remember how to do "y"? Teaching researchers may
seek the answer to questions such as "What is the effect of teaching
procedure "a" on the rate of acquisition of skill "b" in children with
achievement level "c"?

This chapter examines the kinds of research methods which can be used to
identify relationships between teaching events (and other kinds of
events) and student learning. We pay particular attention to the kinds
of research methods which can be used to identify cause-and-effect
relationships because these are the ones which are of greatest interest
to teachers. The chapter is divided into the following sections.

Section 1 examines the kinds of research questions which are possible
and groups them into a number of categories according to the research
method required in order to answer the question.

Section 2 focuses on methods which can be used to identify functional
relationships (that is, cause and effect relationships) and examines the
relationship detection methods which have been developed by behaviour
analysts, cognitive and social scientists, and ethnographers.

Section 3 evaluates the relative utility and productivity of the
experimental relationship detection procedures developed behaviour
analysts, cognitive scientists and ethnographers.

Section 4 discusses the quality characteristics which must be met if an
experimental analysis is to yield a believable result. The following
experimental design features are identified and discussed: the
reliability (reproducibility) of the experimental procedure, the
accuracy of the measure of experimental effects, the validity of the
conclusions drawn from the experimental result, and the chain of
inference which is involved in interpreting the result of an experiment
in learning (or teaching).

Section 5 examines the accuracy of the inferences which are being drawn
from the results of (a) the within-subject experiments of the behaviour
analyst and (b) the randomised groups experiments of the cognitive
scientist and identifies some of the problems arising from the way in
which significance testing procedures are currently being employed.
