---
grand_parent: 'Learning interactions and their component events '
great_grand_parent: 'Important learning and teaching events '
great_great_grand_parent: 'Welcome to Teacher Education''s Core Knowledge and Skills.'
has_children: false
layout: default
nav_order: 4
parent: 'Prompts '
title: 'Copying and non-copying prompts '
---
# Copying and non-copying prompts


```yaml
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
```


It is important to distinguish between prompts which stay in view while
the learner responds and prompts which are presented (and removed)
before the learner responds. For example a teacher might show a child
how to spell a word by orally spelling the word before the child begins
to write or by writing down the word for the child to copy. The first
case is an example of a non-copying prompt. *A non-copying prompt is a
prompt which is presented and removed before the learner responds.* The
second case is an example of a copying prompt. *A copying prompt is a
prompt (usually a model) which stays in view while the learner
responds.*

Copying and non-copying prompts perform different functions during
acquisition. For example, some responses are so difficult to perform
that a model which the learner can copy is required. Copying and
non-copying prompts also have different effects. During the early stages
of acquisition, for example, a copying prompt may result in the
performance of a completely new response and, hence, learning. During
the later stages of acquisition, copying prompts often result in copying
rather than learning.
