---
has_children: true
layout: default
nav_order: 2
title: 'Prompts '
---
# Prompts 


::: documentByline
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
:::

::: {#parent-fieldname-text-b76300c101824e588d5a82b09cb58df2}
An important type of antecedent stimulus event is the stimulus which
serves the function of showing the learner how to perform a new
behaviour (or how to respond correctly to a new stimulus). This kind of
antecedent event is commonly referred to as a prompt. A prompt is an
antecedent stimulus, *additional to the practice stimulus,* which has
been provided with the aim of helping the learner to perform the correct
or appropriate response to a practice stimulus.

Prompts are defined in terms of their effects. *Prompts are antecedents
which have the effect of making performance of the correct response more
likely*. Prompts can also have the effect of helping the learner to
respond more accurately, or more proficiently, or more expertly. An
antecedent only meets the definition of a prompt if it increases the
likelihood of the learner responding correctly (or with greater
expertise) to the practice stimulus. Prompts are identified by first
identifying the practice stimulus and then by asking whether any
additional help has been provided to show the learner how to respond to
that practice stimulus.

Being able to identify prompts is an essential teaching skill because
prompted practice usually results in much more rapid acquisition of new
skills and understandings than trial and error practice. In fact, a
sequence of prompted practice responses is usually an essential teaching
condition during the teaching of new responses.

Prompts are also referred to as "scaffolds" and the act of prompting as
"scaffolding" by many writers. However, the term "scaffold" is used more
as a metaphor than as a technical term, and those who use the term
scaffold have yet to distinguish between the many different kinds of
scaffolding activity which are possible. Because these problems can be
avoided by using the terms *prompt* and *prompting,* it is these terms
which will be used in this account.

Prompts can take many different forms. They can take the form of
demonstrations, oral descriptions of what to do, written instructions,
rules, directions to attend to a particular part of a stimulus display,
hints, clues, and so on.
:::
