---
layout: default
title: "Conditions which may accelerate the learning of new knowledge responses 
"
nav_order: Conditionswhichmayacceleratethelearningofnewknowledgeresponses
has_children: false
---
# Conditions which may accelerate the learning of new knowledge responses 


::: documentByline
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
:::

::: {#parent-fieldname-text-4dbad6b34daf4df8858954d4f146c58c}
In addition to the three necessary conditions suggested by a structural
analysis of the acquisition of new knowledge, research into the
variables affecting this type of acquisition suggest that there are a
number of variables which may operate to facilitate or hinder the rate
at which new knowledge responses are acquired. These variables include
the meaningfulness of instructional presentations, the number of
learning channels activated by the presentations, the clarity of
instructional texts, the extent to which essential and non-essential
information is differentiated, the extent to which the learner receives
additional practice on difficult topics, the extent to which the teacher
provides regular tests of progress (and reinforcement for progress
towards the learning goal), and the study skills of the learner.

**1. The meaningfulness of the presentations containing the new
knowledge**

Both experience and research indicate that remembering is strongly
affected by the meaningfulness of instructional presentations and texts
(e.g., Marks, Doctorow & Wittrock, 1974). This means that acquisition
will be strongly affected by the teacher's ability to select or
construct knowledge presentations which are phrased in language which is
understood by each of the learners in the instructional group.

Because the content of meaningful presentations is learned and
remembered so much more quickly, acquisition will be affected by the
extent to which teachers check each student's comprehension of the
presentations containing to-be-learned information. If the presentations
contain words or terms which are not understood by an individual learner
then acquisition will be affected by the extent to which the teacher
provides supplementary presentations designed to teach the meanings of
these unknown words.

**2. Whether presentations activate more than one learning channel**

Presentations containing to-be-learned information may activate a single
learning channel or several learning channels. Lectures activate a
single learning channel (hearing) and textbooks activate a single
learning channel (seeing). Audio-visual presentations activate two
learning channels (hearing and seeing).

There is some between-groups research which suggests that presentations
which activate two learning channels (e.g. seeing and hearing) result in
the learner remembering more of the content of a presentation than if
only one learning channel has been activated (Mayer & Moreno, 2003).
This effect has been observed with students engaged in several different
knowledge learning tasks using printed explanations with and without
tape-recorded versions of those explanations (Mousavi, Low & Sweller,
1995; Tindall-Ford, Chandler & Sweller, 1997), with multimedia
presentations consisting of either an animation plus on-screen textual
information (visual only) or an animation plus an audio commentary
(audio-visual) (Mayer & Moreno, 1998), and with multimedia presentations
of how lightning occurs in which some students have watched an on-screen
animation plus on-screen explanations while others have been presented
with the animation, the on screen explanation, and an audio narration
(Moreno & Mayer, 2002). All of these experiments have been replicated.

So far these effects have only been shown with upper secondary and
tertiary level students. There do not appear to have been any controlled
demonstrations with younger learners of superior recall following
presentations which activate two learning channels rather than one.
Secondly, the effect is only observed under certain conditions. It is
not observed if the visual presentation contains redundant information
(such as unnecessary animations) and it is not observed if the audio
presentation contains redundant information (such as unnecessary sound
effects) (Moreno & Mayer, 2002). Presumably this is because the
additional redundant information uses processing capacity which cannot
be applied to the to-be-learned information. Thirdly, the effect is more
often observed in instructional situations where working memory is
likely to be working to capacity, that is, with complex learning tasks
or with low achieving students. It tends not to be observed in
situations where the working memory load is limited, that is with simple
learning tasks and with high achieving learners who are experienced in
handling complex tasks (Mayer & Moreno, 2003; Tindall-Ford et al.,
1997).

**3. The level of clarity and organisation of the texts which are being
studied**

An analysis of the texts which are commonly used during classroom
instruction in new knowledge topics reveals that they tend to suffer
from a number of shortcomings. Some texts are difficult to study from
because they introduce too many new concepts and provide insufficient
examples to communicate the meanings of the concepts which are being
introduced. This is a common failure of commercially produced primary
school mathematics textbooks (Carnine, Jitendra & Silbert, 1997;
Jitendra, Carnine & Silbert, 1996). When a textbook contains
insufficient explanation and/or examples to teach new concepts and
understandings, learning objectives cannot be met for many students
unless the teacher supplements the information in the text using lessons
which provide additional explanations and examples of the concepts which
are a part of the teaching aim.

Some texts are difficult to study from because they include too much
factual detail. With this kind of text, much instructional time may be
wasted while the student reads and studies material which is not part of
the teaching aim and which does not actually have to be learned. Further
instructional time may be wasted while the learner struggles to
distinguish between important and unimportant information. We will
consider this problem in the section which follows.

Some texts are difficult to study because they are poorly organised.
This may be because the information on a particular concept or topic is
scattered about rather than being grouped in one place, or because
topics are not separated by clear subheadings, or because the
subheadings provide poor descriptions of the information which follows,
or because the presentation is illogical and difficult to follow. With
these kinds of texts, it seems likely that learning might be accelerated
simply by substituting a better organised and more user friendly text on
the topic.

**4. The extent to which essential and non-essential information is
differentiated**

One of the most difficult tasks which learners face during knowledge
learning tasks is that of discriminating between those items of
information which have to be mastered (in the sense that they will be
tested at the end of the unit of study) and those items of information
which, although contained in the text or the lesson, are not part of the
teaching aim and do not actually have to be learned and remembered.

It seems reasonable to assume that learners at all levels are more
likely to attend to and learn those items of information which need to
be mastered if these items are clearly identified. There are a variety
of ways of helping learners to identify the items of information which
comprise the actual teaching aim. The following examples illustrate some
of these possibilities.

-   The teacher can build up a whiteboard summary for the students to
    copy as the lesson proceeds.
-   Written texts can be marked (using underlining or highlighting) to
    show the specific items of information which have to be learned.
-   A set of aims can be added to the written text listing the learning
    objectives for each chapter or unit of study.
-   Questions similar to those which will be used for assessment
    purposes can be inserted at regular intervals throughout the text.
-   A summary which lists the key items of information (the information
    which is to be learned and remembered) can be added to the text or
    supplied as an addition to the text.
-   The teacher can provide the learner with a copy of the test
    questions which will be asked at the end of the unit of study.
-   The learner can be given the opportunity to complete practice tests,
    or progress tests (covering the material which has to be learned and
    remembered) at regular intervals during the unit of study.

It seems reasonable to assume that any activity on the part of the
teacher which operates to clearly specify the actual content to be
mastered will result more rapid mastery of that content and this
assumption is supported by several studies (e.g. Hamilton, Siebert,
Gardner, & Talbert-Johnson, 2000; Lazarus, 1991).

**5. The extent to which the learner receives additional practice on
those aspects of the topic which are likely to cause difficulty**

Nuthall and Alton-Lee (1993) found some items of information which were
not learned and remembered even although the learner experienced the
information four times with no more than two days between each pair of
experiences. The types of knowledge learning which learners found most
difficult to remember were (a) those where the material contradicted a
strongly held belief, (b) those which introduced ideas which were new
and difficult to understand and (c) those which introduced details which
were difficult to memorise.

*Content contradicts a widely held belief.* A number of descriptive
studies have documented the fact that learners often bring previously
learned misconceptions to a unit of study, misconceptions which
interfere with their attempts to learn new concepts and principles. This
happens most often in science subjects where the scientific or "correct"
way of describing a particular phenomenon often differs from our
everyday way of describing that phenomenon. Nuthall and Alton-Lee (1993)
give the example of children who failed to learn the proposition *Clouds
are made of little drops of water* because most of them believed that
"Clouds are made of white gasses".

With well-structured instruction, these misconceptions can be readily
overcome as Muthukrishna, Carnine, Grossen & Miller (1993) have
demonstrated. But, in order for this to happen, two conditions must be
met. First, the teacher must identify those items of information which
students are having difficulty with because of previously learned
misconceptions. This can be accomplished only if the teacher includes
oral interaction or progress tests as part of the instruction. Secondly,
students must be provided with additional presentations which explain
why the new response provides a better explanation than the widely held
belief and additional practice opportunities with respect to these
particular items of information.

*Content includes a new and difficult concept*. Knowledge learning
topics often have, as one of their main aims, the introduction of
information about one or more new and unfamiliar concepts. Information
about concepts which are unfamiliar, complex, or difficult to understand
usually require the student to engage in a larger number of learning
interactions than is the case with simpler concepts. If the teacher
fails to provide the additional explanations and instructional
interactions needed in order to teach the meaning of a difficult
concept, that concept may not be learned. The meaning of new and
difficult concepts may be clarified in a variety of ways: by showing how
the term is normally employed in a variety of contexts, by the use of
definitions or explanations, by providing illustrative examples and
non-examples, by means of analogies, and so on. Another procedure which
is often suggested as a way of making new terms meaningful (and hence
more likely to be remembered) is to engage in conversational activities
which require the learner to relate new information to previously
acquired knowledge and understandings.

*Topic includes easily confused details.* The same general rule applies
to those items of information which are likely to be confused either
because the learner is being asked to recall very specific details or
because the learner is being asked to discriminate between questions
and/or answers which are closely similar and hence easily confusable.
Examples include numerical quantities, dates, proper names, and so on.
These kinds of details must be learned verbatim and accurate recall
requires additional practice. For these items, too, rate of acquisition
will depend upon the extent to which the teacher provides the learner
with additional learning opportunities and additional practice so that
the teaching aim can be achieved.

**6. The extent to which the teacher provides regular tests of progress
and reinforcement for progress towards the learning goal**

The only way in which the teacher can be sure that a given set of
knowledge responses has been acquired is to ask the learner questions
about the information which has been presented or which is being
studied. This should be done several times during the study of each new
topic so that the teacher (and the learner) can identify the targeted
knowledge responses which have and have not been acquired up to that
point. These progress tests allow the teacher (and the learner) to
identify the information which is already known, to remove this from the
pool of information which is being studied, and hence to save valuable
study time. More importantly, these tests allow the teacher (and the
learner) to identify the information which has not yet been learned and
to schedule further study of this yet-to-be-learned material.

It seems reasonable to assume that the reinforcement of progress towards
the teaching goal is as important during knowledge learning as it is
during any other kind of learning. Where the aim is to motivate
progress, reinforcement may be made contingent upon either of two
distinguishable classes of behaviour (a) engaging in activities (such as
making notes) which are likely to result in the new information being
remembered, or (b) demonstrating that increasing numbers of the targeted
knowledge responses have been learned. Although there is little evidence
one way or the other, it seems likely that reinforcing *progress*
results in more rapid progress than reinforcing study skills (Gettinger,
1989). However, it is only possible to reinforce increases in the number
of knowledge responses which have been mastered if instruction includes
regular quizzes or progress checks during the course of instruction.

For some students, studying will be reinforced by the improvement which
they are making and the feedback which they are receiving for their
answers to study questions. Others will be motivated by their desire to
avoid responding incorrectly to study questions. However, there will
always be some students for whom these sources of reinforcement are
insufficient to motivate consistent study and practice of a given unit
of knowledge. In these cases, acquisition of the new knowledge responses
can be accelerated by the application of teacher mediated reinforcement
(encouragement, praise, graphs of progress, contingent access to
reinforcing activities, and so on) made contingent upon progress towards
the learning goal.

**7. The extent to which the learner is able to apply effective study
skills**

One of the long term aims of schooling is to bring students to the point
where they can function as self-directed learners who are able to
independently locate relevant information, organise it, and learn it
effectively. The skills which are involved in the effective, independent
study of new material are variously referred to as study skills,
executive control functions, strategies, and metacognitive strategies.
We will use the term *study skills*.

Research into the skills which mature learners use during periods of
independent study has identified a number of different study skills
(e.g., Presley, Harris & Guthrie, 1992). Some of these are skills which
mature learners use to make sense of difficult or poorly organised
texts. Obviously it is important that these skills be acquired prior to
tertiary level study where their use will be assumed. At the earlier
(e.g. primary) levels of schooling, however, a choice has to be made
between the selection of well organised texts and spending time teaching
pupils to make sense of poorly organised texts. Usually it will be more
efficient simply to select clearly written and well organised texts.

However, even with well-organised texts there are still a number of
study skills which the learner can use to accelerate the acquisition of
new knowledge responses. The most important of these appear to be
self-directed comprehension monitoring, summarising, rehearsing, and
self-evaluation. While some students acquire these skills without formal
instruction, all can be directly taught and "the research in
self-monitoring and strategy instruction has shown that students who
have been given direct or explicit instruction in strategies do better
than those who have not received such instruction" (Goetz, Alexander &
Ash, 1992, p. 436).

**Independent reading.** In order to study new information
independently, the learner must have acquired a basic level of reading
competence. Chall (1983) argues that normally developing students make
the transition from "learning to read" to "reading to learn" at around 8
years of age. Others have argued that a reading level of about 10 years
is required for independent study. Regardless of the exact level of
reading development required, it is clear that a basic level of reading
ability is a prerequisite for independent study because, until a student
can read an expository text with sufficient comprehension and sufficient
speed to locate relevant information, little independent study is
possible. It follows therefore, that fluency in reading is the first of
the study skills which must be targeted for mastery. Until the most
basic study skill (the ability to read with fluency and comprehension)
has been acquired, the teaching of new knowledge responses is limited to
instruction in the oral mode.

**Comprehension monitoring.** Once the learner can read independently,
the next study skill to be acquired is that of monitoring one\'s
understanding of what is being read. This skill is most commonly
referred to as *comprehension monitoring*. Since we are here talking
about self-directed study skills, we will use the term *self-directed
comprehension monitoring.* Comprehension monitoring involves regularly
pausing (a) to check that the current paragraph was understood, (b) to
review the content of what has been read up until that point and (c) to
predict the content of what is to follow. Self-directed comprehension
monitoring skills have been taught using a variety of procedures of
which two, *co-operative scripts* and *reciprocal teaching*, have been
shown by research to work reasonably well.

*Co-operative scripts*. With co-operative scripts, the text to be
studied is divided into 500-600 word sections. "Students work in pairs
and take turns summarizing sections of the material for one another.
While one student summarizes, the other listens and corrects any errors
or omissions. Then the two students switch roles, continuing in this way
until they have covered all the material to be learned" (Slavin, 1991,
p. 173). A series of studies of the co-operative scripts procedure found
that students who study in this way obtain higher average retention test
scores than students who summarise on their own (e.g. McDonald, Larson,
Dansereau & Spurlin, 1985).

*Reciprocal teaching*. With reciprocal teaching, students work in groups
of three or four with the teacher. Once the procedure has been mastered,
students may work without the teacher. The text is divided into segments
(initially one or two paragraphs in length). Students take turns at
being the "leader". It is the leader\'s task to: (a) ask questions about
the text which everyone has just read, (b) frame a summary of what has
just been read, (c) predict what the author might discuss next in the
passage, (d) identify text segments which are unclear and to lead a
discussion which might clarify the meaning of that segment.

The effects of reciprocal teaching on comprehension were first described
by Palincsar and Brown (1984). Rosenshine & Meister (1994) reviewed 16
experimental evaluations of the effects of reciprocal teaching on
measures of reading comprehension. They report a median effect size of
0.32 for the 9 studies which used a standardised measure of reading
comprehension and a median effect size of 0.88 for the 10 studies which
tested comprehension on a new passage similar to those used during
practice. The higher effect sizes for the experimenter-constructed
comprehension tests was probably a function of the fact that tests
tended to be much more similar to the practice passages than the test
passages in the standardised tests of reading comprehension.

**Self-directed summarising.** The third skill which is essential for
self-directed study is the ability to construct summary notes which list
the information to be studied. These summaries may take the form of
summary notes or summary diagrams.

*Summary notes*. Learning how to construct a summary list of main points
for future study is a difficult skill to master. It may be taught by
initially providing the learner with lists of study questions which are
to be answered during reading, or by providing the learner with a set of
incomplete notes which are to be completed during study (Lazarus, 1991),
or by using a more systematic training procedure. One systematic
training procedure is that which has been described by Cook and Mayer
who developed a two-part training program in generative note taking for
science-naive students.

"First, students learned to recognize basic prose structures such as
generalization (a main idea followed by supporting evidence),
enumeration (a list of factors or properties all pertaining to some
topic) and sequence (steps in a cause and effect process). Then,
students learned to take notes for each type of structure by writing the
generalization and supporting evidence for a generalization paragraph,
by the listing the facts and the topic for an enumeration paragraph, and
by listing the cause and effect chain for a sequence paragraph. A
teacher modelled her note-taking strategies and then students compared
their approach to that of the teacher" (Mayer, 1992).

While the ability to make useful notes is widely regarded as an
important study skill, research into its effects on learning are
inconsistent. "It is important to note that several studies have found
no effects of summarization, and the conditions under which this
strategy increases comprehension or retention of written material are
not well understood" (Slavin, 1991, p. 173).

*Summary diagrams.* Summary diagrams are variously referred to as webs,
networks, concept maps and graphic organisers. *Graphic organisers* is
the term used in this account. A graphic organiser is a visual display
of key concepts in the text set out in the form of a set of linked
concepts, or a hierarchy, or a flow chart. Many people find it easier to
remember information in the form of a graphic organiser than information
in the form of summary notes. However, the research sometimes finds a
facilitating effect for graphic organisers (e.g., Darch & Carnine, 1986;
Darch, Carnine, & Kameenui, 1986; Guastello, Beasley & Sinatra, 2000)
and sometimes does not (Eggen, Kauchak & Kirk, 1978). "There is little
direct experimental support for the utility of spatial learning
strategies as student study systems \... It may be that their best
applications occur with older (i.e. junior-high and up) students"
(Goetz, Alexander & Ash, 1992, p. 473).

**Self-directed rehearsal.** Once the information to be learned has been
gathered together in one place, the learner is often expected to study
and learn (i.e. memorise) this information independently. This requires
a fourth set of study skills on the part of the learner. We will refer
to these skills as *self-directed rehearsal skills*. Self-directed
rehearsal of new material may take a variety of forms. It may involve
repeated reading of the material to be learned. It may involve the
repeated writing of summaries of important points. It may involve
question-and-answer sessions with peers who are studying the same
material. It may involve self-questioning or cover-copy-compare
activities of various kinds. Or it may involve a mixture of these
activities.

Students who apply self-directed rehearsal procedures to the task of
learning discrete responses such as new spelling responses learn these
more quickly than students who do not (Church, 1992). Presumably, the
same is true during the self-directed study of new information although
the question seems never to have been studied experimentally.

**Self-evaluation.** The fifth skill which needs to be acquired before a
student can engage in self-directed study is *self-evaluation*. Students
need to learn how to determine, for themselves, whether sufficient
self-directed study has been undertaken. Younger learners tend to
underestimate the amount of time (and the number of repetitions) which
are required in order to master new knowledge responses (Gettinger,
1989). (Older learners often make the same mistake as well.) It is
important, therefore, that students be taught how to make the judgement
regarding whether or not sufficient study has been undertaken to meet
the learning goal.

Self-evaluation skills can be taught by providing the learner with
repeated opportunities to engage in the following cycle of activities:
(a) set independent study goal, (b) engage in independent study, (c)
complete a test on the material, and (d) receive feedback on the
effectiveness of the independent study in which they have engaged. Mary
Beth Gettinger (1989) suggests that about six goal-study-test-feedback
cycles are sufficient to teach 8-year olds how much study is required to
meet a defined learning goal. Obviously, this training would need to be
repeated for different kinds of learning goals.
:::

::: referencesList
#### References

-   Carnine, D., Jitendra, A. K., & Silbert, J. (1997). A descriptive
    analysis of mathematics curricular materials from a pedagogical
    perspective: A case study of fractions. The Journal of Special
    Education, 18, 66-81.
-   Chall, J. S. (1983). Stages of reading development. New York:
    Academic Press.
-   Church, R. J. (1992). Measuring the effects of teaching on learning.
    Paper presented to the Second Joint AARE/NZARE Conference, Geelong,
    Australia.
-   Darch, C., & Carnine, D. (1986). Teaching content area material to
    learning disabled students. Exceptional Children, 53, 240-246.
-   Darch, C. B., Carnine, D. W., & Kameenui, E. J. (1986). The role of
    graphic organizers and social structure in content area instruction.
    Journal of Reading Behavior, 18, 275-295.
-   Eggen, P. D., Kauchak, D. P., & Kirk, S. (1978). The effect of
    hierarchical cues on the learning of concepts from prose materials.
    Journal of Experimental Education, 46(4), 7-11.
-   Gettinger, M. (1989). Effects of maximizing time spent and
    minimizing time needed for learning on pupil achievement. American
    Educational Research Journal, 26, 73-91.
-   Goetz, E. T., Alexander, P. A., & Ash, M. J. (1992). Educational
    psychology: A classroom perspective. New York: Macmillan Publishing
    Co.
-   Guastello, E. F., Beasley, T. M., & Sinatra, R. C. (2000). Concept
    mapping effects on science content comprehension of low-achieving
    inner-city seventh graders. Remedial and Special Education, 21,
    356-365.
-   Hamilton, S. L., Seibert, M. A., Gardner, R., & Talbert-Johnson, C.
    (2000). Using guided notes to improve the academic achievement of
    incarcerated adolescents with learning and behavior problems.
    Remedial and Special Education, 21, 133-140, 170.
-   Jitendra, A., Carnine, D., & Silbert, J. (1996). Descriptive
    analysis of fifth grade division instruction in basal mathematics
    programs: Violations of pedagogy. Journal of Learning Disabilities,
    6, 381-403.
-   Kelly, K., Ayllon, T., & Kandel, H. (1979). A method for building
    complex academic repertoires. In P. O. Sjoden, S. Bates, & W. S.
    Dockers (Eds.), Trends in Behavior Therapy. New York: Academic
    Press.
-   Lazarus, B. D. (1991). Guided notes, review, and achievement of
    secondary students with learning disabilities in mainstream content
    courses. Education and Treatment of Children, 14, 112-127.
-   Marks, C. B., Doctorow, M. J., & Witrock, M. C. (1974). Word
    frequency and reading comprehension. Journal of Educational
    Research, 67, 259-262, 295.
-   Mayer, R. E. (1992). Guiding students' cognitive processing of
    scientific information in text. In M. Pressley, K. R. Harris,
    & J. T. Guthrie (Eds.), Promoting academic competence and literacy
    in school. San Diego, CA: Academic Press Inc.
-   Mayer, R. E., & Moreno, R. (1998). A split-attention effect in
    multimedia learning: Evidence for dual processing systems in working
    memory. Journal of Educational Psychology, 90, 312-320.
-   Mayer, R. E., & Moreno, R. (2003). Nine ways to reduce cognitive
    load in multimedia learning. Educational psychologist, 38(1), 43-52
-   McDonald, B. A., Larson, C. D., Dansereau, D. I., & Spurlin, J. E.
    (1985). Cooperative dyads: Impact on text learning and transfer.
    Contemporary Educational Psychology, 10, 369-377.
-   Moreno, R., & Mayer, R. E. (2002). Verbal redundancy in multimedia
    learning: When reading helps listening. Journal of Educational
    Psychology, 94, 156-163.
-   Mousavi, S. Y., Low, R., & Sweller, J. (1995). Reducing cognitive
    load by mixing auditory and visual presentation modes. Journal of
    Educational Psychology, 87, 319-334.
-   Muthukrishna, N., Carnine, D., Grossen, B., & Miller, S. (1993).
    Children\'s alternative frameworks: Should they be directly
    addressed in science instruction. Journal of Research in Science
    Teaching, 30, 233-248.
-   Nuthall, G. & Alton-Lee, A. (1993). Predicting learning from student
    experience of teaching: A theory of student knowledge construction
    in classrooms. American Educational Research Journal, 30, 799-840.
-   Palincsar, A. S., & Brown, A. L. (1984). Reciprocal teaching of
    comprehension fostering and comprehension monitoring activities.
    Cognition and Instruction, 2, 117-175.
-   Pressley, M., Harris, K. R., & Guthrie, J. T. (Eds.) (1992).
    Promoting academic competence and literacy in school. San Diego, CA:
    Academic Press, Inc.
-   Rosenshine, B., & Meister, C. (1994). Reciprocal teaching: A review
    of the research. Review of Educational Research, 64, 479-530.
-   Slavin, R. E. (1991). Educational Psychology (3rd ed.). Englewood
    Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
-   Tindall-Ford, S., Chandler, P., & Sweller, J. (1997). When two
    sensory modes are better than one. Journal of Experimental
    Psychology: Applied, 4, 257-287.
:::
