---
layout: default
title: "The acquisition of new generalisations 
"
nav_order: Theacquisitionofnewgeneralisations
has_children: false
---
# The acquisition of new generalisations 


::: documentByline
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
:::

::: {#parent-fieldname-text-278cebacacb1476594a3639730b23289}
Many of the objects and events which children must learn to respond to
correctly belong to stimulus classes. Orange objects belong to the
stimulus class *orange*. Addition word problems belong to the stimulus
class *addition problems*. Teacher statements about what the child
should do next belong to the stimulus class *teacher instructions*.

A stimulus class consists of individual instances. (Instances are often
referred to as members, or as examples of the class.) There are
literally millions of possible instances of the stimulus class *orange
objects*, for example. The instances (examples) of a particular stimulus
class share certain common features or samenesses. The sameness which
defines membership in the stimulus class *orange objects* is their
orange colour. Individual instances also exhibit certain other features
which are irrelevant to membership in the stimulus class. Orange
objects, for example can vary widely with respect to size, function,
composition, location, and so on and all of these features are
irrelevant as far as the response "orange" is concerned.

Another common kind of acquisition outcome, then, is learning how to
recognise and respond correctly to the members of a stimulus class.
Often we refer to this kind of correct responding as "understanding"
(e.g. "I see that you now understand the difference between nouns and
adjectives.") But this is only one of several kinds of "understanding"
which are possible so, to avoid confusion, we cannot call this learning
outcome "understanding". Some writers refer to this kind of learning as
"concept learning" and this is one of the most common kinds of
generalised responding. But "concept learning" does not really cover the
case of recognising that a previously learned skill is appropriate in a
new setting. Some writers refer to this kind of correct responding as
"transfer" (which is short for "transfer of training") and others talk
about "application". Many learning researchers use the term
*generalisation* when talking about the ability to recognise that
different things belong to the same stimulus class and should be
responded to in the same way. For this reason we too will use the term
generalisation to refer to this kind of acquisition outcome.

As is the case in the learning of new equivalence relations, generalised
correct responding involves learning to respond correctly to new
stimulus items. Unlike the learning of equivalence relations (where the
stimulus always takes the same form), generalised correct responding
involves learning to recognise and to respond to the *sameness* which
defines membership in a stimulus class so that even new examples from
the stimulus class are recognised and responded to correctly.

Generalised correct responding is an extremely common kind of
acquisition outcome.

-   This is the acquisition outcome whenever the teacher seeks to
    develop an understanding of a new concept. In this case, the
    stimulus class is a class of objects, events, or qualities and the
    correct response is using the concept name correctly. This kind of
    generalised correct responding is commonly referred to as *concept
    learning* and this is appropriate.
-   Generalised correct responding is also the acquisition outcome
    whenever the teacher seeks to teach the learner how to solve a
    particular *class* of problems (such as addition word problems), or
    how to distinguish between different classes of problems. In this
    case, the stimulus class is a class of questions or problems and the
    correct response is the procedure (the operation) for solving this
    kind of problem. It is this kind of generalised correct responding
    which is often referred to as *transfer*.
-   Generalised correct responding is the acquisition outcome whenever
    the teacher seeks to ensure that the learner will learn to apply a
    new skill across a range of different settings. For example, the
    teacher might seek to teach a child to "not to interrupt others when
    they are speaking but to wait" and to apply this rule in all
    conversational situations. In this case, the stimulus class is
    "other person speaking" and the response is "waiting until the
    speaker is finished". This kind of learning outcome is usually
    referred to as *generalisation across settings*.

Unlike the learning of an equivalence relation (which involves a single
discrimination) mastery of a generalisation involves the mastery of two
discriminations. The first task facing the learner is that of learning
to discriminate between the features which are relevant to membership in
the stimulus class (relevant to responding) and the features which are
irrelevant. Before a child can learn to use colour names correctly, he
or she must learn to discriminate between the colour of objects (the
relevant feature) and all other features of the objects such as their
size, shape, material construction, location, function, and so on (the
irrelevant features).

Different stimulus classes are comprised of instances which possess
different defining features or samenesses. Members of the stimulus class
*orange objects* differ from members of the stimulus class *yellow
objects* by virtue of their difference in colour. So the second task
facing the learner is that of learning to discriminate between (and to
respond differently to) the different samenesses which define membership
in different stimulus classes. The child who is learning colour names,
for example, must learn to distinguish between those hues which we
customarily refer to as "orange" and those hues which we customarily
refer to as "yellow" and to respond differently to examples from the two
stimulus classes.

A child who is learning how to respond correctly to addition word
problems faces the same kind of requirement. In order to learn the
difference between addition word problems and other kinds of word
problems, the child must learn two discriminations. First, child must
learn to discriminate between that feature of the problem which is
relevant to the decision regarding the procedure which should be applied
and those features of the problem which are irrelevant to this decision.
Secondly, the child must learn to discriminate between the features
which indicate that the problem can be solved using an addition
procedure and the features which indicate that some other procedure will
need to be applied. This kind of generalised correct responding is a
common kind of learning outcome. We expect children to acquire the
ability to solve not only the problems and examples which we use during
teaching but also problems and examples other than the particular
problems used during instruction, and we expect this to happen across
all curriculum areas.

**Measuring the acquisition of generalised correct responding.** The
critical feature which distinguishes learners who have acquired a good
understanding of a new concept or generalisation from those who have not
is that the former can correctly identify new examples of the concept
while the latter can not. The level of generalisation which has been
acquired is measured by counting correct responses. The only difference
is that the "test" items must consist of new examples, that is, examples
which have never been encountered before. Only if the test examples are
never-before-seen examples can the teacher be sure that the child has
acquired the targeted generalisation and is not just demonstrating that
they have remembered the examples which were used during instruction.

To measure the development of a new generalisation, we provide the
learner with examples and non-examples which have not been seen before,
observe responses to both the examples and the non-examples, and
classify these responses as correct or incorrect. Increases in the ratio
of corrects to errors from day to day provide a measure of the rate of
acquisition of new generalisations such as conceptual understanding.
Generally speaking, half a dozen test items (two or three new examples
and two or three new non-examples) will be sufficient to determine
whether or not the student has mastered a new generalisation. Provided
the test consists of new examples and non-examples, a lengthy test is
not required in order to determine whether or not a student has mastered
a new generalisation.
:::
