---
layout: default
title: "Effects of varying the distribution of practice responses in time 
"
nav_order: Effectsofvaryingthedistributionofpracticeresponsesintime
has_children: false
---
# Effects of varying the distribution of practice responses in time 


::: documentByline
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
:::

::: {#parent-fieldname-text-6d7ca94fe21c4037ac7272f52aea5067}
Most practice is distributed across several days or weeks. Based on the
results from several studies which tracked every lesson concept which
was learned and remembered or learned and forgotten by individual
children, Nuthall and Alton Lee (1993) concluded that practice responses
with a particular fact or concept are likely to be remembered if no more
than 2 days elapses between practice responses with that concept but
forgotten if practice sessions are more than two days apart.

We also know that the mammalian brain continues to show changes at the
neuronal level for up to 12 hours following a single learning
experience.

Much of what we know about the brain changes which occur during learning
has come from a series of experiments by the British neuroscientist
Steven Rose and his colleagues. Rose has studied the changes which occur
in the brains of day-old chicks who have learned to avoid pecking silver
coloured beads covered with a bitter tasting liquid -- something which
most day-old chicks learn to do following a single experience with the
bitter taste. Postmortem comparisons of the brains of trained and
untrained chicks have revealed that experience with the bitter bead
leads to changes in several distinct regions of the chick's brain --
changes which continue for up to 12 hours. The earliest changes begin
immediately following experience with the bitter bead and include an
increased blood flow, increased glucose uptake (for energy), increased
electrical activity, and changes to the structure of the synapse. These
are followed by the manufacture of new synaptic chemicals, especially
glycoproteins. In the hours which follow, these glycoproteins are
inserted into the walls of the synapses to produce a 60 per cent
increase in the number of dendritic spines (receptor sites) and synapses
(Rose 1993). Changes in one part of the chick's brain are then followed
by changes in several other parts of the brain. Rose believes that the
occurrence of changes at several different sites is evidence that the
brain is classifying the experience under several different headings
(Rose, 1993).

At the present time, research into the most effective distribution of
specific practice responses across time is almost non-existent because
very few learning researchers have taken the trouble to track the
occurrence of specific practice responses across time. However, if the
distribution of particular practice responses in time is a critical
learning variable (as is suggested by the Rose research and the Nuthall
research) then this has fairly profound implications not only for
teaching practice but also for research on teaching.

One of the research implications is, that in order to accurately
interpret the results of learning and/or teaching experiments, the
experimenter will need either to track, or else to control the
distribution in time of all practice events with respect to each
to-be-learned response. Failure to control the number of practice
opportunities and their distribution in time may leave the teaching
researcher with uninterpretable experimental results.
:::

::: referencesList
#### References

-   Nuthall, G., & Alton-Lee, A. (1993). Predicting learning from
    student experience of teaching: A theory of student knowledge
    construction in classrooms. American Educational Research Journal,
    30, 799-840.
-   Rose, S. (1993). The making of memory. Toronto: Bantam Books.
:::
