---
grand_parent: 'Is a move to evidence-based teaching practice feasible at this time? '
great_grand_parent: 'Types of research evidence '
great_great_grand_parent: 'Teacher Education''s Core Knowledge and Skills.'
has_children: false
layout: default
nav_order: 4
parent: 'Research in general or just the scientific research? '
title: 'Is the ethnographic approach a scientific approach? '
---
# Is the ethnographic approach a scientific approach?


```yaml
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
```


It is hard to tell whether ethnographers intend that their research
efforts should be regarded as scientific efforts. Qualitative
researchers of the interpretivist persuasion usually argue that research
into human affairs is more like an artistic exercise than a scientific
one. "The activity of construing human behaviour in social science
cannot be modelled on the parallel attempt to account for natural
events" (Macdonald & Pettit, 1981, p. 103). "Social science, insofar as
its concern is the explanation of social behaviour, begins to look like
a discipline which belongs with the humanities rather than the sciences"
(Macdonald & Pettit, 1981, p. 104).

Other qualitative researchers argue that qualitative research can meet
scientific standards. "Scientific research involves rigorous and
systematic empirical inquiry that is data-based. Qualitative research
meets these requirements" (Bogdan & Biklen, 1992, p. 43). However, an
examination of the reports of qualitative inquiries suggests that
qualitative studies rarely, if ever, meet the conventionally expected
requirements of scientific research.

Ethnographers have yet to develop an agreed taxonomy for classifying the
different kinds of changes customarily included under the heading of
learning and they have yet to develop any kind of common procedure for
classifying the different kinds of experiences which might be considered
to be necessary for learning. There is no sign of the emergence of a
common terminology which can be used to describe the various kinds of
learning outcomes, the various kinds of teaching events, or the
important features of educational sites and their activities.

Ethnographers have yet to develop a set of standard procedures for
measuring and describing those changes in competence, motivation, and so
on which are included under the heading of learning. Qualitative
researchers do not distinguish between direct and indirect measures of
actions and perspectives, they do not distinguish between interval scale
and nominal scale measures of behaviour, and they do not distinguish
between idemnotic and vaganotic measures of change. Textbooks on
qualitative research methods simply ignore all of these matters.

Ethnographers do not routinely assess the reliability of their
observational procedures or the credibility (accuracy) of the data which
these procedures generate and, in fact, disagree amongst themselves as
to how either of these goals might be achieved. Individual studies are
almost never replicated so the qualitative literature includes no data
which could be used to evaluate the reliability of the procedures which
are being used and no information regarding the generality of the
conclusions which are being drawn from each study.

Ethnographers are currently limited to a descriptive methodology. They
have yet to develop any kind of procedure for measuring the effects of
teaching and other kinds of experiences on learning. Because they have
yet to develop any kind of experimental methodology, they have no way of
checking the validity of the relationships which they believe they have
identified. Furthermore, ethnographers have yet to consider any of the
methodological questions regarding how one might set about identifying
factors which affect learning, how one might measure the effects of
particular teaching practices on particular learning outcomes, or how
one might evaluate the relative effectiveness or efficiency of different
instructional provisions.

Most importantly of all, qualitative research is failing to identify
relationships between particular kinds of experiences and particular
kinds of learning outcomes, failing to generate any kind of generalised
knowledge which could be used by teachers, and hence failing to generate
improvements in our understanding of either learning or teaching
processes. That this is so is demonstrated by the fact that there are no
textbooks summarising the agreed findings of the qualitative research
(into learning and teaching) which has been undertaken over a period of
more than 30 years.

In 1979, Reichardt and Cook predicted that "once qualitative methods
have been put to the test as thoroughly as quantitative procedures have
been in the past, the qualitative methods will be found to be just as
fallible and feeble" (Reichardt & Cook, 1979, p. 26). Twenty-five years
later it appears that this prediction has turned out to be true.


#### References

-   Bogdan, R. C., & Biklen, S. K. (1998). Qualitative research for
    education: An introduction to theory and methods (3rd ed.). Boston:
    Allyn and Bacon.
-   Macdonald G., & Pettit, P. (1981). Semantics and social science.
    London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
-   Reichardt, C. S., & Cook, T. D. (1979). Beyond qualitative vs.
    quantitative methods. In T. D. Cook & C. S. Reichardt (Eds.),
    Qualitative and quantitative methods in evaluation research (pp.
    7-32). Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
