---
grand_parent: 'How is learning to be observed and recorded? '
great_grand_parent: 'Types of research evidence '
great_great_grand_parent: 'Welcome to Teacher Education''s Core Knowledge and Skills.'
has_children: false
layout: default
nav_order: 2
parent: 'Beliefs about the nature of reality and what can be observed '
title: 'Assumptions about what can be accomplished by observation '
---
# Assumptions about what can be accomplished by observation 


::: documentByline
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
:::

::: {#parent-fieldname-text-60cbc3b6a4d748f8a31a083ba9e2c138}
Researchers bring to the research task different assumptions regarding
what can be achieved by systematic observation. Assumptions which we
make about our ability to observe the events which are occurring in the
world in which we live, and the accuracy and reliability of the
knowledge generated by such observations, are usually referred to as
epistemological assumptions. Is it possible, for example, for several
different researchers to observe a particular behaviour change and to
come to some agreement about what they have seen? The assumptions which
the researcher makes about questions such as these also influence what
is looked for and what is seen as a result of that looking.

**Relativism**

Researchers who believe that individual observers construct their own
realities tend also to argue that there can be no such thing as an
objective (that is, an accurate or unbiased) observation of learning or
teaching. They argue that what an observer sees when observing is
affected by the previously acquired beliefs, concepts and theories of
the observer and that, as a consequence, different observers of the same
set of social events are unlikely to agree about what they have seen.
The belief that what is seen is dependent upon, or relative to, the
beliefs of the observer is usually referred to as *relativism*.

**Empiricism**

Other researchers believe that things like learning and teaching can be
observed (however imperfectly) and that there is some point in doing so
(even if only to find out what works). This position has been referred
to using a number of terms: empiricism, objectivism, positivism,
naturalism, and so on. We will refer to this position as *empiricism*.

Most learning researchers tend to take an empiricist position, that is,
to assume that one can learn from looking, because the research activity
(looking) only makes sense if one assumes that events such as learning
can be observed and that the results of such observations can be
described with reasonable accuracy. Most empirical researchers recognise
that accurate observation and reporting is often difficult and may, in
fact, become possible only once suitable observational instruments have
been invented. Most empirical researchers also recognise that what one
looks for and sees is affected by the concepts and theories of the
researcher and that, no matter how much care is taken, mistakes are
often made. The empiricist simply argues that, while observing and
reporting may be difficult, it is not impossible; that it is often
possible for different people to observe the same event and to come to
an agreement about what they have seen.
:::
