# The distinction between antecedent stimuli and consequences \n

::: documentByline
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
:::

::: {#parent-fieldname-text-4e442dc9d8d44838aeb291d73f8b35d1}
In the analysis and description of learning interactions, two general
classes of stimuli are always distinguished: stimuli which are sensed
*before* the learner responds and those which the learner senses *after*
the response has been made. Events which occur before the learner
responds are referred to as *antecedent stimuli*. Antecedent stimuli are
stimuli which the learner responds *to*.

Events which are experienced *after* a response has been made are
referred to as *consequences*. Responses often have consequences. I look
for something (response) and I find it (consequence). I write something
(response) and the teacher corrects it (consequence). It is important to
note that *consequences are also stimuli,* that is, they are events
which are seen or heard or otherwise sensed by the learner. If the
learner draws a picture and then hears the teacher say "That's lovely"
the teacher's remark is a consequence because (a) it occurs after the
response of drawing the picture and (b) it is a stimulus (an event heard
by the learner). *Consequences are events which the learner sees, or
hears, or otherwise senses immediately following performance of the
response, behaviour or action which is of interest*. Most consequences
are external to the learner. They are changes to the environment --
changes produced by the behaviour which has just been performed. It is
also possible for the consequence of an action to be internal. I start
eating an ice cream and experience a nice taste. I take an aspirin and
cease to experience a headache.

In the following learning interaction, the teacher\'s question is the
antecedent stimulus (A), the learner\'s answer is the response (B), and
the teacher\'s comment is the consequence (C).

![Figure 2412a. A simple 3-term learning
interaction](../../../../../../assets/images/TECKSFig2412a.png "Figure 2412a. A simple 3-term learning interaction"){.image-inline}

*Figure 2412a. A simple 3-term learning interaction*

The distinction between antecedents and consequences is simply a
distinction in time. Events which occur *prior* to a response are
antecedents. Events which occur *after*, or following, or as a result of
a response are consequences. Note also that, in order to identify the
antecedents and the consequences for a particular response, we must
first specify the response (the aspect of the learner\'s behaviour)
which we wish to talk about. Until a particular action has been
specified, it is not possible to distinguish between those events which
are antecedents and those which are consequences for that action.

Sometimes the consequence part of a learning interaction is not
immediately visible, or is missing altogether. In the following exchange
there are two interactions (because there are two responses) and there
is a consequence following the second response, but there is no apparent
consequence following the first response (apart from the next teacher
request).

![Figure 2412b. A learning interaction with two learner responses and
one
consequence](../../../../../../assets/images/TECKSFig2412b.png "Figure 2412b. A learning interaction with two learner responses and one consequence"){.image-inline}

*Figure 2412b. A learning interaction with two learner responses and one
consequence*

In some interactions, the behaviour of interest consists of several
attempts to respond to a single antecedent stimulus.

![Figure 2412c. A learning interaction with a response which includes a
self-correction](../../../../../../assets/images/TECKSFig2412c.png "Figure 2412c. A learning interaction with a response which includes a self-correction"){.image-inline}

*Figure 2412c. A learning interaction with a response which includes a
self-correction*
:::
