---
grand_parent: '''Welcome to Teacher Education''''s Core Knowledge and Skills.'''
has_children: true
layout: default
nav_order: 3
title: 'Types of research evidence '
---
# Types of research evidence


```yaml
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
```


It is increasingly being argued that teaching practice should be
evidence based. But there are many different kinds of research into
learning and teaching and this claim (that teaching should be evidence
based) only becomes meaningful if we say what kind of research evidence
we are talking about.

In addition, people outside education are beginning to notice that much
educational research doesn't look anything like the scientific research
which usually precedes technological advances and that it doesn't seem
to be resulting in any kind of cumulative development in our
understanding of learning or any kind of visible improvement in our
ability to design effective teaching programmes.

These observations raise a number of questions. How should learning and
teaching be studied? Are there particular research methods which provide
more compelling evidence than others about how best to bring about
different kinds of learning outcomes in different kinds of learners? Or
have education researchers yet to reach agreement on how the effects of
teaching on learning might best be measured? What is to count as
research evidence? Is there any agreed research evidence on which
teaching practices might be based? In this book we will consider these
questions in some detail as we explore the different assumptions which
are being made and the different research methods which are being
employed by those who are engaged in research into learning and
teaching.

This book consists of four major chapters.

Chapter 1 considers various widely used research methodologies
(approaches to research) and asks which of these methodologies have
learning and/or teaching as their subject matter in the sense that they
attempt to identify functional relationships between possible teaching
variables and possible learning outcomes.

Chapter 2 addresses the question of how learning is to be observed and
measured and what is to count as an accurate and reliable record of
learning.

Chapter 3 asks how the effects of teaching variables on learning are to
be identified and measured.

Chapter 4 considers the types of evidence which might be used in a move
to evidence-based teaching practice and asks whether we have yet
discovered enough about the relationships between teaching variables and
learning outcomes to justify a move towards evidence-based practice in
the classroom.
