# Differential reinforcement \n

::: documentByline
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
:::

::: {#parent-fieldname-text-193144f6cdc04e62b429ef09d9691d99}
Reinforcement and punishment contingencies seldom occur in isolation.
This is because we have choices; a child can choose either to attend or
not to attend to the teacher. It is also the case that when we are
practising some responses are correct or satisfactory while others are
incorrect or less than satisfactory. Correct responses and errors
typically have different consequences as do improvements and
non-improvements in performance. For example, the teacher may mark
correct answers as correct and the incorrect answers as errors to be
corrected. Similarly, the teacher may respond to improvements with
praise but react to responses which show no improvement by asking the
learner to "try again".

When certain members of a response class result in reinforcement and
other members of the same response class do not we refer to the two
contingencies which are operating as differential reinforcement.

Differential reinforcement of improvements in performance may be
intentionally managed by the teacher (as when the teacher praises
successful responses and ignores unsuccessful responses) or it may occur
naturally as a result of the learner's performance (as when accurate
shots go through the basketball hoop and inaccurate shots do not).

Differential reinforcement is the third most important teaching
variable. Practice opportunities are necessary for learning as is the
appropriate scheduling of these practice opportunities in time. But
practice only results in the in the appearance of new skills and
abilities if improvements in performance (or correct responses) are
differentially reinforced.
:::
