---
grand_parent: 'Verbal learning processes '
great_grand_parent: 'The conditions upon which learning depends '
great_great_grand_parent: 'Welcome to Teacher Education''s Core Knowledge and Skills.'
has_children: false
layout: default
nav_order: 5
parent: 'How conceptual responses are acquired '
title: "Necessary condition 5.\_Sufficient practice to ensure retention "
---
# Necessary condition 5. Sufficient practice to ensure retention


```yaml
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
```


How much practice should the learner receive during the initial learning
phase? It is often difficult to predict just how much practice an
individual learner will require in order to acquire a generalised
correct response to the members of a stimulus class. "Because of
individual learner differences, a specific number of examples will never
be appropriate for teaching a discrimination to all students (Becker &
Carnine, 1980, p. 456). Nevertheless, if the aim of teaching is to bring
the student to the point where they consistently respond correctly to
new examples of the stimulus class, then practice should continue until
this goal is achieved. Even when the generalisation has been acquired,
it will still need to be reviewed (practised) from time to time in order
to prevent it from being forgotten.

As new generalisations are acquired, students need to receive practice
in responding correctly to mixed sets of examples from both old and new
stimulus classes. Following instruction in recognising addition word
problems, practice can only be provided in distinguishing between
examples and non-examples of this type of problem. Following subsequent
instruction in subtraction word problems, the student should be provided
with practice in which they have to distinguish between examples of
addition problems and examples of subtraction problems. Following
instruction in how to recognise multiplication word problems, the
student can be provided with practice in what is usually referred to as
"mixed sets" of examples, that is, examples of addition, subtraction and
multiplication word problems. Since most curricula are cumulative, it
seems safe to assume that some practice with mixed sets should be
provided following instruction in how to recognise each major new class
of problems. Since text books rarely provide mixed sets for students to
practise on, the mixed sets which are required for this kind of practice
will, in most cases, have to be generated by the teacher.


#### References

-   Becker, W. C., & Carnine, D. (1980). Direct Instruction: An
    effective approach to educational intervention with the
    disadvantaged and low performers. In B. B. Lahey & A. E. Kazdin
    (Eds.), Advances in clinical child psychology (Vol. 3). New York:
    Plenum Press.
