# Clarity of curriculum goals \n

::: documentByline
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
:::

::: {#parent-fieldname-text-ccbcd0908516445d9f501840bd668443}
National curriculum documents rarely specify just what it is students
are expected to learn, when they are expected to learn it, or how well
they are expected to learn it. This means that it is up to individual
schools to set out the specific learning goals to be achieved by
children at each year level in each of the eight essential learning
areas. Individual schools vary widely with respect to the degree of
clarity in goal specification which they have succeeded in achieving in
the school schemes which describe the programme of work and expected
achievement levels which the teachers in that school are expected to
work towards.

The existence of a school scheme with clearly specified learning
objectives for each of the essential learning areas at each age level
saves much teacher time -- time which can be spent on teaching rather
than on curriculum translation and goal specification activities.
However, there exist no working definitions of "levels of clarity" in
the specification of teaching objectives at the school level, and no
procedures for assessing or evaluating how well individual school
schemes have succeeding in specifying the teaching objectives which they
contain.
:::
