---
has_children: false
layout: default
nav_order: 2
title: 'The extent to which missing method prerequisite skills are taught '
---
# The extent to which missing method prerequisite skills are taught 


::: documentByline
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
:::

::: {#parent-fieldname-text-5cdfc7caea434f27a95941cd94873281}
Careful observation of the way in which individual students cope with
different kinds of classroom activities fairly quickly identifies those
students who have and have not mastered key method prerequisite skills.
What is the teacher to do if there are one or more students in the class
who have yet to master one or more of the skills which are assumed by a
learning activity which the teacher seeks to use? There are three main
options.

The first alternative is to pause and teach the missing method
prerequisite skills to the students who have yet to acquire them. All
method prerequisites can be and have been taught. The child who cannot
read quickly enough to keep up with his peers can be given fluency
building exercises to increase reading speed. We will refer to this type
of remedial teaching activity as *the teaching of missing method
prerequisite skills.*

The second alternative is to change or adapt the teaching method or
learning activity to one which involves method prerequisite skills which
the student *has*, in fact, mastered. If the student can\'t read yet,
then learning can still continue in the oral mode. If the student can\'t
write yet, then learning can still continue if the child is allowed to
work and respond orally. We will refer to this type of response as
*changing the teaching method.*

A third alternative is to provide the learner with some kind of
prosthetic device (some kind of aid) such as a calculator, a word
processor, a peer helper, and so on. For example, if the student has not
yet mastered the basic multiplication facts, they may still be able to
participate in area and volume lessons by being allowed to complete the
necessary calculations with the aid of a calculator. We will refer to
this type of action as the *provision of prosthetic support.*

All of these adaptations require additional work on the part of the
classroom teacher and individual teachers vary with respect to their
motivation and their ability to ensure that the learning activities
which are being selected from hour to hour are ones which all students
can successfully complete. Teacher variability in adapting instruction
to variations in method prerequisite skills affects student learning in
the classroom and is another variable which needs to be taken into
account during any study of the effects of teaching on learning in this
context.
:::
