---
has_children: false
layout: default
nav_order: 1
title: 'How useful are the correlational procedures of the cognitive scientist? '
---
# How useful are the correlational procedures of the cognitive scientist? 


::: documentByline
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
:::

::: {#parent-fieldname-text-627aff15b2f24a7b8a3d4b166cbe41f4}
One of the ways in which cognitive scientists attempt to identify
relationships is by applying various kinds of correlational procedures.
In 1995, some 30 per cent of the published social science research into
learning and teaching involved the application of correlational research
methods (Church, 1998). This is surprising given that most kinds of
learning experiences (including all of the teaching content and teaching
method variables) can be manipulated experimentally, given that a
correlational study cannot identify cause-and-effect relationships, and
given that the information generated by a correlational study is
relatively trivial information. Possibly the reason for the continued
inappropriate use of the correlational study is because it is relatively
easy to administer tests, self-report scales, or instruments to a sample
of learners, to calculate the correlation between these measures, and to
write up the results of the study for a research dissertation or
publication.

As a procedure for identifying functional relationships, correlational
procedures have certain shortcomings -- shortcomings which are often
exacerbated by the widespread tendency to misinterpret the data which
can be obtained from such studies.

1\. The size of the correlation coefficient tends to increase as sample
heterogeneity increases. It is, therefore, not possible to evaluate a
reported correlation, or to compare the correlations obtained across
different studies of the same variables, unless the sample standard
deviations are reported for each of the measures which were
administered. Although essential, this information (the sample variance)
is frequently omitted from published reports of correlational studies.
This omission makes these studies uninterpretable (Cohen, 1997).

2\. The size of the correlation coefficient depends to a very large
extent on the degree of overlap between the constellation of skills,
achievements, and/or beliefs sampled by each of the measures used. Where
there is any overlap at all, a statistically significant correlation is
to be expected. It is this factor which makes the results of most
correlational studies trivial. Furthermore, interpretation of a
correlation coefficient is only possible if the researcher either
provides a detailed description of the repertoire of skills,
achievements, or beliefs assessed by each measure, or reproduces those
measures in an appendix to the research report. This information,
however, is rarely provided by the authors of correlational research
reports.

3\. Correlational methods continue to be used by social and cognitive
science researchers to test cause-and-effect hypotheses (Valsiner,
1986). This is an illegitimate use of the correlational method and is
described as such in most research methods text books. "One cannot
impute causal relationships to such variables on the basis of the
correlation coefficient alone" (Popham, 1967, p. 75). The use of complex
variants of the correlational method (such as linear regression or path
analysis) does not alter this fact.

4\. The correlation coefficients obtained during correlational
investigations are most commonly interpreted by applying a test of
statistical significance to the obtained correlation coefficient. Given
a reasonable number of subjects, a very small correlation coefficient
will often be sufficient to reject the null hypothesis that there is no
signficant correlation between two measures of the same subjects. In the
real world, however, a given measure of performance is of little use as
a predictor variable unless it accounts for a reasonable proportion (say
50 per cent or more) of the variance in the second variable - and it is
this criterion which should be applied in interpreting the results of
all correlational studies of learning and teaching variables.

5\. Researchers who use correlational designs frequently use them in an
attempt to measure the correlation between organismic variables (such as
intelligence, educational level, or gender) and learning outcomes, that
is, to study behaviour-behaviour relationships. The rationale behind the
use of organismic variables as independent variables is that such
variables function as adequate substitutes for the learning histories of
which they are the outcome. "Subjects come to our studies with these
variables (characteristics) ready-made. . . . Early environment,
heredity and other circumstances have made individuals what they are"
(Kerlinger, 1964, p. 42). The social scientist\'s use of organismic
variables as independent variables is problematic because most of the
organismic variables studied by social and cognitive scientists (reading
level, intelligence, self esteem, locus of control, and so on) are, in
fact, *classes of learning outcomes*. Eventually, a science of learning
will need to describe the origins of reading skills, intellectual
skills, self-esteem, locus of control beliefs, and so on and this can
happen only if such skills and beliefs are treated as dependent
variables, that is, only if they are treated as the phenomena which are
to be explained - perhaps by studying the learning histories which give
rise to them.
:::

::: referencesList
#### References

-   Church, R. J. (1998). The utility of qualitative, social science,
    and behaviour analysis research into learning and teaching. Paper
    presented to the annual conference of the New Zealand Association
    for Research in Education, New Zealand.
-   Cohen J. (1997). The earth is round (p\<.05). In L. L. Harlow, S. A.
    Mulaik, & J. H. Steiger (Eds.), What if there were no significance
    tests? (pp. 21-35). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
-   Kerlinger, F. N. (1964). Foundations of behavioral research:
    Educational and psychological inquiry. New York: Holt, Rinehart and
    Winston Inc.
-   Popham, W. J. (1967) Educational statistics: Use and interpretation.
    New York: Harper & Row.
-   Valsiner, J. (1986). Between groups and individuals: Psychologists\'
    and laypersons\' interpretations of correlational findings. In J.
    Valsiner (Ed.), The individual subject and scientific methodology
    (pp.134-151). New York: Plenum Press.
:::
