---
has_children: false
layout: default
nav_order: 5
title: 'The acquisition of new knowledge '
---
# The acquisition of new knowledge 


::: documentByline
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
:::

::: {#parent-fieldname-text-d8d3b148c41a416ca8106ee81c15d3d4}
There is a third kind of correct responding which we expect of children
and this is the acquisition of new knowledge. In this third case, the
learner\'s response does not have to be an exact, word-for-word
reproduction of the original information in order to qualify as
"correct". The response will be judged to be correct as long as the
*meaning* of the response matches the *meaning* of the original
presentation. For example, I might ask "What is prompting?" and accept
as correct any of the following answers: "helping the learner to respond
correctly" or "assisting the learner to make the correct response", or
"an action which increases the likelihood of the learner making the
correct response".

Consider the following textbook extract on the changing states of matter

![Figure 2136. Fourteen knowledge propositions from a section of a
primary school science
textbook](../../../../../../assets/images/TECKSFig2136.png "Figure 2136. Fourteen knowledge propositions from a section of a primary school science textbook"){.image-inline}

*Figure 2136. Fourteen knowledge propositions from a section of a
primary school science textbook*

This passage, which is part of a textbook chapter on "Changes in the
States of Matter", introduces four concepts: *melting*, *vaporisation*,
*condensation*, and *solidification*. However, it is clear that
generalised correct responding is not going to be required. The concepts
are illustrated using only two examples: water (i.e. water vapour,
water, ice) and ether (i.e. ether vapour and liquid ether). Since the
passage contains only two examples, it is clear that a generalised
understanding of the four concepts is not expected. Rather the reader is
being given the definition and an example or two of each concept and it
is these which, presumably, the learner will be expected to remember.
(Note that, in this example, the writer has assumed that the reader
already understands the concepts of a *solid*, *liquid*, and *gas*.) The
passage also discusses two principles: (a)Â the principle that melting
and vaporisation require the addition of heat and (b) the principle that
condensation and solidification require the subtraction of heat. The
water and ether examples are again used to illustrate these two
principles.

How can we tell whether a learner has acquired the "new knowledge" which
he or she has been expected to acquire? What we do is to ask the student
oral or written questions about the topic. This is possible because each
of the items of information in an expository passage such as the extract
above can be expressed in the form of a proposition. Some of these
propositions are concept definitions (e.g. "condensation refers to the
change from a gaseous to a liquid state"). Some are statements of a
principle (e.g. "heat is required when evaporation takes place"). And
some are illustrations, that is, propositions about examples (e.g. "when
heat is added, ice changes to liquid water"). In order to ascertain
whether or not a student has learned a particular proposition (item of
information) we turn the proposition into a question. For example, "What
happens when ice is heated?"

It can be seen that the defining features of this type of learning
outcome are as follows

-   The learner demonstrates that learning has occurred by demonstrating
    that they can talk or write about the proposition at some later
    date. We usually refer to this behaviour as "recalling" or
    "remembering" the material.
-   Knowledge propositions may be propositions about facts; concept
    names, definitions, examples; statements of a principle, or examples
    of a principle; or any mixture of these things.
-   Knowledge responses do not have to match the wording of the original
    presentation in order to be classified as correct. Except in the
    case where particular names are being learned, it is usually
    sufficient for the meaning of the response to match the meaning of
    the original presentation for the response to be classified as
    correct.

This kind of learning goes by a variety of different names. We talk
about "learning" new information, we talk about "remembering" new
material, we talk about "understanding" new ideas, we talk about
"constructing new meanings", and we talk about acquiring new
"knowledge". "Acquiring new knowledge responses" probably comes closest
to describing this particular kind of learning outcome.

**Measuring the acquisition of new knowledge.** This kind of acquisition
is most typically assessed by writing questions about the topic of
interest and observing the student\'s verbal responses (either oral or
written) to these questions. Answers are classified as correct if the
*meaning* of the student\'s answer matches the meaning of the answer
which is sought. A word-for-word match is not required as it is during
the learning of new equivalence relations and new concepts. Increases in
the number of questions which the student can answer correctly (from one
observation to the next) provide a measure of the rate of acquisition of
new knowledge responses.

It is often a requirement that the student\'s knowledge responses be
ones which demonstrate an understanding of the material which is being
talked about. With knowledge learning, understanding of the content of a
proposition is demonstrated when the student demonstrates that they can
respond to questions about that proposition which are *paraphrases* of
the original presentation. In order to respond correctly to a
paraphrased question, the student must have understood and remembered
the meaning of the original proposition (and not just memorised the
words used in the presentation of the proposition).
:::
