---
layout: default
title: "Negative reinforcement contingencies 
"
nav_order: Negativereinforcementcontingencies
has_children: false
---
# Negative reinforcement contingencies 


::: documentByline
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
:::

::: {#parent-fieldname-text-8efa0e94c54a4c89aee58248934ac112}
A particular behaviour can also function to *put a stop* to things, or
enable us *to escape* from things or *to avoid* things. For example, a
child might be being reprimanded by a parent, the child might apologise
and the parent might cease her reprimanding. In this case the child's
behaviour (apologising) has put a stop to something which was happening
(the parent's reprimands). Or a child might be being teased by another
child and the child who is being teased might run away. In this case the
child's behaviour (running away) has enabled the child to escape from
something which was happening (the teasing). Or a student might notice
that the teacher has glanced his way and get back to work in order to
avoid a reminder from the teacher. In this case the student's behaviour
(getting back to work) has avoided an outcome which would otherwise
occur (a reminder from the teacher).

When someone continues to engage in a behaviour (or begins to engage in
a behaviour more frequently) because that behaviour works to get rid of,
or to subtract something from that person\'s immediate environment, or
to avoid an aversive (unpleasant) consequence which would otherwise
occur, the recurring relationship between behaviour and consequence is
referred to as a *negative reinforcement contingency*.

The negative reinforcement contingency is defined as follows:

*If* (a) a behaviour begins to *put a stop to,* or to *avoid* an event,

and (b) the behaviour *increases* in frequency

*then*

\(a\) the event is a *punisher* (an aversive event),

and(b) the contingency is a *negative reinforcement* contingency

Negative reinforcement contingencies are extremely common in everyday
life. We navigate our environment with care because careful behaviour
avoids the falls, the bruises and the injuries which we would experience
if we did not act carefully. We behave politely because polite behaviour
avoids the refusals, the rebukes and the anger which we would tend to
elicit in others if we did not behave politely. At the secondary school
level, much class work and much homework is completed, not because of
the reinforcing outcomes which this behaviour produces, but because it
avoids the teacher disapproval and parental disapproval which might well
occur if the work was not completed.

**Escape responses.** Negatively reinforced responses may be of two
general kinds: escape responses and avoidance responses. An *escape
response* is a response which functions to put a stop to an aversive
state of affairs or which allows the learner to escape from an aversive
state of affairs. An example might be the child who turns on a heater
(or who moves to a warmer room) to escape from the cold.

**Avoidance responses.** Not only do we learn to terminate and to escape
from aversive (punishing) situations, we also learn how to avoid
aversive situations altogether. We learn to recognise the signals which
indicate that punishment is imminent and we learn to take evasive
action - to engage in *avoidance responses* - which enable us to avoid
the aversive consequence altogether. The child who is reprimanded for
arriving late to class may be motivated to arrive on time in order to
avoid further reprimands. The child who dawdles and has to complete her
maths instead of reading (which is a preferred activity) may be
motivated to work more quickly next time in order to avoid further
deprivations of this kind.

Note that *both positive and negative reinforcement contingencies
function to motivate the continued use of a particular response.* If a
person is motivated to continue performing a particular behaviour
because of the reinforcing outcomes which it produces, the contingency
is a *positive* reinforcement contingency. If a person is motivated to
continue performing a behaviour because that behaviour works to avoid
certain aversive events, then the contingency is a *negative*
reinforcement contingency.

It is important to distinguish between positive reinforcement and
negative reinforcement contingencies. This is because, although the two
contingencies both function to motivate continued performance of a
behaviour, the emotional effects of the two contingencies are quite
different. The only consequence of failing to perform a positively
reinforced behaviour is that you do not get the reinforcement. The
consequence of failing to perform a negatively reinforced behaviour,
however, is that you fail to avoid punishment. When children are working
under negative reinforcement contingencies, errors, mistakes, and other
kinds of failure result in punishment. Working to avoid punishment
(working under the constant threat of punishment) leaves people feeling
anxious and motivates them to look for ways of avoiding the situation
altogether. Working to earn reinforcement, on the other hand, leaves
people feeling more confident and more positive about the situation in
which they are working and the tasks which they are being asked to
perform. In short, positive reinforcement contingencies produce positive
attitudes and negative reinforcement contingencies produce negative
attitudes.
:::
