---
has_children: false
layout: default
nav_order: 8
title: 'Negative punishment contingencies '
---
# Negative punishment contingencies 


::: documentByline
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
:::

::: {#parent-fieldname-text-2554da21782d4da0a51c6aea2df0e652}
There is a second kind of penalty which a behaviour may have. A
behaviour may have a cost. When performed, it may result in the
*subtraction* of something from that person\'s environment. It may
function to put a stop to something which the person would prefer to see
continued. It may result in the removal of something which the learner
would rather not have removed. For example, the student who parties
instead of studying may fail to gain a pass in the course which they
have enrolled in. Or the football player who stomps on another player
may be sent off the field and prevented from playing for the rest of the
game. A behaviour which consistently results in a loss or postponement
of reinforcement, and which begins to be used less often as a result, is
said to be on a *negative punishment contingency*. "Negative" because
something is being removed and "punishment" because the behaviour begins
to be used less often.

Negative punishment is defined as follows.

*If* (a) a behaviour begins to result in the *loss or postponement* of
something,

and (b) the behaviour *decreases* in frequency

*then*

\(a\) the something is a *reinforcer*,

and (b) the contingency is a *negative punishment* contingency

A number of different terms have been used to refer to the negative
punishment contingency. Negative punishment contingencies have been
referred to as Type II punishment contingencies, as response cost, as
punishment by removal, as fining, as reinforcement loss and so on.

Negative punishment contingencies are widely used as instruments of
social control. The sports person who infringes the rules of their sport
may be banned from playing for a certain period of time. The penalty for
certain illegal behaviours is a fine. The penalty for more serious
infringements of the law is imprisonment (the loss of access to most
sources of reinforcement for a given period of time). Some of the
penalties which are used by schools as punishments for misbehaviour have
the potential to function as negative punishment contingencies - being
deprived of access to a favourite activity, being required to sit apart
from the rest of the class, being sent from the classroom, being sent to
detention and so on.

Two negative punishment operations are commonly employed by parents and
teachers. These are *response cost* and *time out from reinforcement.*

**Response cost.** A response cost contingency is one where a behaviour
has a penalty and the penalty is the loss of some portion of a
previously earned or previously granted reinforcement. For example, an
older child breaks a window and the consequence is that he has to pay
for the window out of his pocket money.

**Time out from reinforcement.** With time out, the penalty is a
temporary interruption or postponement of access to currently
reinforcing activities. Examples of contingencies which are often
intended to act as time out contingencies are sending the child to the
side of the classroom for a few minutes following stated misbehaviours
(often referred to as "sit and wait"), sending the child to her room
following stated misbehaviours at home (often referred to as "time
out"), and sending a player off the field following a rule infringement.
:::
