# Interactions which can and cannot result in learning \n

::: documentByline
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
:::

::: {#parent-fieldname-text-694b4e5486e44ae1bb005e2d8426178b}
In order for an interaction to result in learning it must involve an
action or set of actions which have not yet been mastered by the
learner. It must involve a response which cannot yet be performed
without prompting, or which cannot yet be performed correctly, or which
cannot yet be performed with sufficient speed. It can be seen therefore,
that not all of the interactions which occur in classrooms are learning
interactions.

A commonly occurring classroom interaction which is not a learning
interaction is the procedural interaction. For example, a teacher might
say to a group of 10-year olds, "Put your books away". Clearly the
teacher is not providing an opportunity for the children to practice
putting their books away. Rather the teacher is engaged in an
organisational activity -- perhaps beginning a transition from one
learning activity to the next.

Organisational activities are quite common in classrooms and need to be
clearly distinguished from learning activities. For example, an activity
which involves setting up a series of groups for co-operative group work
in social studies (an organisational activity), needs to be
distinguished from the social studies activity itself (the learning
activity itself).

Organisational activities are often initiated by a series of *procedural
instructions* from the teacher. Procedural instructions may take a
variety of forms. They may describe the learning activities which are
going to occur. They may describe the order in which learning activities
are to be completed. They may indicate what the learner is to do next.
Or they may describe how a learning activity is going to be organised.
Just as procedural interactions (which involve actions which have
already been mastered) need to be distinguished from learning
interactions, so procedural instructions must be distinguished from
practice stimuli and from prompts (which provide opportunities for new
learning to occur).
:::
