---
has_children: false
layout: default
nav_order: 3
title: 'The types of explanation sought by ethnographers '
---
# The types of explanation sought by ethnographers 


::: documentByline
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
:::

::: {#parent-fieldname-text-3ddc7da42a4f4ccb8b7f46296ba46311}
Ethnographers typically use the word *theory* to refer to the set of
generalisations or assertions which appear to be warranted with respect
to the data collected during the course of a particular ethnographic
study. That is, they use the word theory to refer to the grounded theory
which emerges from the analysis of a field work database. Grounded
theory is a local theory, that is, "an aggregate of local
understandings" (Lincoln & Guba, 1985, p. 205).

Ethnographers seem to be ambivalent about the utility of grounded
theory. For some the theory (that is, the assertions or conclusions)
which result from a particular study cannot and should not be
generalised. For others, these conclusions can function in much the same
way as the hypotheses of the social scientist. Theory "is open-ended and
can be extended indefinitely; . . . it can also be used to predict and
to generate hypotheses for test. Grounded theory can play the role of
conventional theory for any subsequent study (one need not return to
\'ground zero\' in each new inquiry)" (Lincoln & Guba, 1985, p. 206).

Regarding the question of whether or not qualitative research might
eventually discover cause and effect relationships, ethnographers have
expressed a variety of conflicting views. Some qualitative researchers
argue that one of the central aims of ethnographic research *is* to
identify enduring generalisations. "The search is . . . for *concrete
universals*, arrived at by studying a specific case in great detail and
then comparing it with other cases studied in equally great detail. The
assumption is that when we see a particular instance of a teacher
teaching, some aspects of what occurs are absolutely generic, that is,
they apply cross culturally and across human history to all teaching
situations" (Erickson, 1986, p. 130).

Some qualitative researchers argue that the aim of qualitative inquiry
is not to discover big generalisations but simply to identify little
generalisations or working hypotheses. "The aim of inquiry is to develop
an idiographic body of knowledge in the form of \'working hypotheses\'
that describe the individual case" (Lincoln & Guba, 1985, p. 38).

A third group of qualitative researchers take the position that any
search for generalisations is bound to fail, that there can be no
generalisations regarding human learning which hold up over time and
place, and that any search for functional relationships,
cause-and-effect relationships, or laws of learning must therefore be a
fruitless search. "The interpretive-idealist approach to research
rejects the possibility that laws will ever be found" (Smith, 1983, p.
12). Guba and Lincoln (1997, p. 87) argue that "Human relationships are
caught up in such an interacting web of factors, events, and processes
that the hope that \'the\' cause-effect chain can be sorted out is vain;
the best the enquirer can hope to establish are plausible patterns of
influence." One implication of this position is that the effect of
particular instances of teaching (or any other type of educational
intervention) can never be predicted. "Interventions can be mounted, but
without any assurance, *regardless of prior evaluation,* that they will
in fact produce the outcomes hoped for" (Lincoln & Guba, 1985, p. 157).

Most ethnographers are interested in explaining the events which they
have observed. "Naturalists as well as other varieties of
postpositivists retain a need for *explanation*" (Lincoln & Guba, 1985,
p. 151). Explanations are sought in the meanings which individuals
attribute to their actions. "From the interpretive-idealist perspective,
the purpose of investigation should be . . . interpretive understanding
. . . the investigator seeks to understand the nature of the activity
and the meaning that the actor assigns to his or her own actions - the
\'why\' of the activity" (Smith, 1983, p. 12). Interpretation of the
reasons why participants have behaved in the way that they have requires
the researcher also to identify the explicit and the implicit social
rules which operate in the setting under examination. In order to
understand human action "We need to identify the rules under which it
falls because they are what give its meaning. The rules under which
actions fall are reflected in the intensional content of the desires and
beliefs that lead to them. That is why desires and beliefs explain
action. Human action is thus a matter of following rules, and the aim of
social science is to uncover these rules" (Rosenberg, 1995, p. 93).
Rosenberg further notes that this is "not a new thesis; indeed, Plato
argues explicitly in the *Phaedo* . . . that human action can only be so
understood" (Rosenberg, 1995, p. 91).

For some qualitative researchers, meanings, purposes, perspectives, and
so on exist in a *causal* relationship to behaviour. Qualitative
researchers refer to these intentional explanations as *interpretations*
and refer to their mode of explanation as interpretivist or
hermeneutical. (These two words mean the same thing.) "If people take
action on the grounds of their interpretations of the actions of others,
then meaning-interpretations themselves are causal for humans"
(Erickson, 1986, p. 127).

For other qualitative researchers, the meaning of an action is simply
part of its description - the meaning of an action has no causal status
(a position which is closely similar to that taken by behaviour
analysts). "In seeking to uncover the meanings of action, Verstahen
explanations do not regard intentions, purposes and motives as some
\'inner\' mental event that somehow causes overt physical behaviour to
occur. Rather, it recognizes that \'intentions\' and \'motives\' refer .
. . to what it is that permits the actions being observed to be
described as actions of a particular sort. Intentions and motives are
not \'behind\' actions, functioning as their invisible mental \'cause\'.
Motives and intentions are intrinsically related to actions as part of
their definition and meaning" (Carr & Kemmis, 1986, p. 90).

This preference for intentional explanations is usually justified by
arguing either (a) that intentional explanations provide a sufficient
explanation for human conduct, or else by arguing (b) that, in human
affairs, functional relationships have not been (and could not ever be)
identified. The first claim, that intentional explanations are
sufficient to provide an explanation of human conduct is open to at
least six criticisms.

1\. If intentional explanations explain anything at all, they explain
only a part of human conduct. A considerable portion of human behaviour
is not intentional; it is reflex, it is automatic, it occurs as a
reaction to events. If a person acts in a shocked manner after an
accident it makes no sense to inquire into the intention or purpose of
the disoriented behaviour and racing heart. If a person acts in a
depressed manner following the loss of a close friend it makes no sense
to inquire into the intention or purpose of the depressed behaviour. If
a person suddenly recalls a conversation held earlier in the week it
makes no sense to inquire into the intention or purpose of the sudden
recollection. Likewise it makes no sense to advance intentional
explanations for breathing, for talking one\'s native language, for
turning to see who has called your name, or for feeling elated or
frightened or sick, to give just a few examples.

2\. Actions not only have purposes, they also have outcomes or effects
(consequences) and these effects are often quite different from the
intended purpose of an action. A teacher takes a particular lesson in a
particular way with the aim or intention of developing a particular
understanding on the part of the children but the *effect* of the lesson
is to leave the children as confused as they were before the lesson.
Accounts which ignore the effects or consequences of human action ignore
a factor which has a most powerful effect on how someone handles a
particular situation on future occasions.

3\. It is fairly clear that intentional explanations cannot be used to
explain (account for) human learning (the development of new
competencies). *Improvements* in performance are a function of
experience and practice (amongst other things). Asking someone to
explain why they engaged in a particular action provides no explanation
of where the ability to perform that action came from in the first
place, how the ability to perform that action was acquired, how the
informant learned to respond in that particular fashion rather than in
some other fashion, or why that particular way of behaving continues to
be used. Critics argue that finding the answers to these latter
questions is actually more important than asking individuals why they
have engaged in particular acts.

4\. Very young children are unable to answer questions about the meaning
or purpose of the things which they do. The ability to give verbal
justifications for particular behaviours in terms of intentions and
purposes is a learned skill. How we learn the intentional idioms of
everyday language (how we learn to justify what we do both to ourselves
and to others) is one of the things which needs to be explained. "If . .
. a belief causes a response, then one must ask where the belief came
from" (Baum & Heath, 1992, p. 1315). "The interpretive model neglects
questions about the origins, causes and results of actors adopting
certain interpretations of their actions and social life" (Carr &
Kemmis, 1986, p. 95). In fact, some critics (e.g., Lee, 1988) argue that
what needs to be explained is both the behaviour and its purpose
together as a single unit. To be useful, an explanation must provide a
plausible account not only of where the behaviour came from but where
the accompanying belief in the effectiveness of that particular
behaviour came from.

5\. It is hard to see how an improved understanding of learning and
teaching could ever result from a research activity which is limited to
simply reproducing the interpretations (that is, the everyday
explanations) which ordinary people already give for what they do. If
research has a purpose the purpose must be to take us beyond what we can
find out simply by canvassing people\'s opinions of how learning occurs.

6\. Finally, it is important to remember that the once universal role
played by intentional explanations has been steadily diminishing for
more than half a century. "The moral of the story is that the appeal to
intentions has been as ruthlessly read out of biology has it was cast
out of physics. . .. This leaves only the social sciences as the last
refuge of an explanatory strategy that started, over two thousand years
ago, as the ruling paradigm in all science" (Rosenberg, 1995, p. 64). It
can be argued that, since the physical, biological and medical sciences
have dispensed with intentional explanations, so too should the
cognitive sciences. "Who would seriously suggest that evolutionary
biologists should have held onto the intentional idioms that were common
before the theory of natural selection? The objection hardly ever comes
up because almost everyone sees that getting rid of intentional idioms
represented an advance for biology. If it is absurd to hold onto
intentional idioms in biology, it is equally absurd to hold onto them in
psychology" (Baum & Heath, 1992, p. 1317).

The second claim, that, when it comes to human affairs, functional
relationships are in principle unidentifiable simply ignores both common
sense and the results of 90 years research into learning and teaching.
The claim that there are no known regularities of human conduct is
clearly not true as far as learning research is concerned. It is clear
from reviews of the experimental literature that a number of enduring
and reproducible relationships between experience and learning have been
identified both by cognitive scientists (e.g., Lipsey & Wilson, 1993)
and by behaviour analysts (e.g., Cooper, Heron & Heward, 1987). When
appropriate research procedures are employed, reproducible relationships
can even be identified by applying a qualitative methodology. For
example, the decision by Nuthall and Alton Lee to record everything
which happened during sets of classroom lessons led to the
identification of relatively clear-cut relationships between the number
and timing of the learning interactions experienced by individual
children and what was learned and remembered by those children. This
research further demonstrated that these relationships exist across
learners, across classrooms, and across different curriculum topics
(see, for example, Nuthall, 1999). The Nuthall results provide a
powerful disconfirmation of the often-voiced claim that classroom life
is too complex to permit the discovery of reproducible relationships
between children\'s experience and children\'s learning.

The claim that there are no known relationships between experience and
human conduct is not even true at the level of everyday experience. If
there were no regularities in human conduct, then conversation and
communication would be impossible, social organisation would be
pointless, and schooling would be a total waste of money. Everyday
experience provides multiple examples of predictability in human
affairs. This predictability occurs both at the level of particulars
(people say that they will meet you at a particular time and this
prediction frequently turns out to be true) and at the level of
generalisations (children learn to speak the language of their parents,
listeners are able to understand and to respond to speakers, children
become more competent in the skills which they practise than in skills
which they do not, and so on).

Thirdly, *even if no relationships had been found between experience and
learning*, this does not mean that such relationships cannot be
discovered. It simply means that no such relationships have been
discovered yet. This could be because we have been using the wrong
research method, or because the research effort has been insufficient,
or because the research is being undertaken by people who believe that
generalisations regarding human learning are unlikely to be identified
and that there is, therefore, little point in looking for them.

It is true that intentional explanations are often used in everyday
speech and that they are often accepted as legitimate reasons
(justifications) during ordinary conversations. However, they cannot be
used as scientific explanations for, while they may appear to explain
why someone engaged in a particular action, they provide no explanation
for classes of actions and no explanation for those changes in behaviour
which we refer to as learning.
:::

::: referencesList
#### References

-   Baum, W. M., & Heath, J. L. (1992). Behavioral explanations and
    intentional explanations in psychology. American Psychologist, 47,
    1312-1317.
-   Carr, W., & Kemmis, S. (1986). Becoming critical: Education,
    knowledge and action research. London: The Falmer Press.
-   Cooper, J. O., Heron, T. E., & Heward, W. L. (1987). Applied
    behavior analysis. New York: Macmillan Publishing Co.
-   Erickson, F. (1986). Qualitative methods in research on teaching.
    In M. C. Wittrock (Ed.), Handbook of research on teaching (3rd ed.,
    pp. 119-161). New York: Macmillan.
-   Guba, E. G., & Lincoln, Y. S. (1997). Naturalistic and rationalistic
    enquiry. In J.P. Keeves (Ed.), Educational research, methodology,
    and measurement: An international handbook (2nd ed., pp. 86-90).
    Oxford, England: Pergamon/Elsevier Science Inc.
-   Lee, V. L. (1988). Beyond behaviorism. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
    Erlbaum Associates.
-   Lincoln, Y. S., & Guba, E. G. (1985). Naturalistic inquiry. Beverly
    Hills, CA: Sage Publications.
-   Lipsey, M. W., & Wilson, D. B. (1993). The efficacy of
    psychological, educational and behavioral treatment. American
    Psychologist, 48, 1181-1209.
-   Nuthall, G. A. (1999). The way students learn: Acquiring knowledge
    from an integrated science and social studies unit. Elementary
    School Journal, 99, 303-341.
-   Rosenberg, A. (1995). Philosophy of social science (2nd ed.).
    Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
-   Smith, J. K. (1983). Quantitative vs. qualitative research: An
    attempt to clarify the issue. Educational Researcher, 15(1), 4-12.
:::
