---
grand_parent: '''Welcome to Teacher Education''''s Core Knowledge and Skills.'''
has_children: true
layout: default
nav_order: 4
title: 'The conditions upon which learning depends '
---
# The conditions upon which learning depends 


::: documentByline
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
:::

::: {#parent-fieldname-text-a6c73b4ef1bd45e68571129c1a14b0b3}
Central to any research base for teaching is the research into how
learning occurs, that is, research into the conditions necessary for
learning. The first thing which we discover when examining the
scientific research into learning is that learning does not involve a
single process. The term "learning" refers to a collection of processes:
respondent learning processes, motivational processes, the processes
involved in the acquisition of new performance skills, verbal learning
processes, social learning processes and so on. Research into the
conditions necessary for learning shows that that the conditions
necessary for learning differ from one learning process to the next.

Research into the conditions necessary for learning is further
complicated by the fact that, while learning researchers divide learning
up into different processes on the basis of the conditions which each
requires, curriculum writers, teachers and teacher educators divide
learning into quite different categories: language learning, literacy
learning, social learning, the learning of mathematics, science, social
studies and so on. These divisions do not map on to the learning
processes delineated by learning scientists in any simple manner and
this further complicates any discussion of the conditions necessary for
learning.

In this book we will explore the learning processes which have been
identified by the scientific research into learning and the conditions
which have been identified, from controlled research, as those
conditions which are necessary in order for each of these kinds of
learning to occur.

This book consists of 5 chapters.

Chapter 1 considers the research on respondent conditioning processes
and identifies the conditions which are necessary for the development of
(a) new meanings (comprehension responses), (b) new likes and dislikes
and (c) new anxieties and fears.

Chapter 2 considers the research on motivation and identifies the
conditions which are necessary for the development of motivation and
persistence.

Chapter 3 considers the processes which result in the acquisition of new
behaviours and skills and identifies the conditions necessary for (a)
the shaping of completely new behaviours and skills and (b) the
acquisition of new procedural skills and operations.

Chapter 4 considers three important verbal learning processes: (a) the
acquisition of new equivalence relations, (b) the acquisition of new
conceptual understandings, and (c) the acquisition of new knowledge and
identifies the essential conditions upon which each of these types of
acquisition depend.

Chapter 5 considers the conditions which are necessary for the
development of mastery where mastery is defined as the ability to
perform a particular response, skill, or task fluently and without
error.
:::
