---
has_children: false
layout: default
nav_order: 1
title: 'Effects of varying the number of responses prompted at one time '
---
# Effects of varying the number of responses prompted at one time 


::: documentByline
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
:::

::: {#parent-fieldname-text-b8430e6fa796414fb676616685f00ced}
How many responses should be prompted at one time? The answer to this
question depends upon the attentional capacity of the learner.

The biological structure of the human brain places limits on the
learner\'s ability to attend to and to process new information. Put
simply, there are limits to the number of things which can be attended
to and \"held in mind\" at any one time. Limits to the number of things
which can be attended to at one time are commonly referred to as \"the
limited capacity of short term memory\" or \"the limited capacity of
working memory\".

The limits to human attention have been the subject of a number of
experimental investigations. During the 1950s for example, several
researchers observed that when words, letters, or digits are read at a
constant rate, adult listeners can recall (i.e. repeat) only six or
seven of the items on the list. In 1956, George Miller summarised the
evidence from a number of these experiments and concluded that adults
can attend to or \"hold in mind\" only about seven items of information
at the same time (Miller, 1956).

Sensory input that the person recognises as important \... is
transferred \... to short-term memory, where it can be retained longer
(up to 15 to 20 seconds without active rehearsal and \... longer if the
person keeps repeating it. However, short term memory has a very limited
capacity. Most people can remember about seven items (numbers, words,
phrases on a list) without making errors or omissions if the items are
unrelated to one another. Thus even a single phone number may be
difficult to remember for even 20 seconds unless it is repeated
continually or written down (Good & Brophy, 1990, p. 214).

Note that the 7-item rule refers to the upper limit of attention for
*adult learners*. For younger children, the restrictions imposed by
\"working memory\" are even more severe.

The severity of the limitations under which young children operate can
be illustrated by describing their performance on the following task.
The object of the task is a simple one: it is to count a number of sets
of objects that have been laid out on a table, and to remember the
number of objects in each set. As each set is counted it is covered up
so that no visual cues to quantity remain. An additional requirement is
that the arrays be counted in immediate succession, with no intervening
time for rehearsing previous answers. Under these conditions, young
children show a remarkable deficit by comparison with adults or
teenagers. Prior to the age of five they are capable of remembering the
number of items in only one set. By the age of five or six their
performance has improved but they can still only remember the number of
items in two sets. It is not until the age of seven or eight that they
can remember the number of items in as many as three sets (Case, 1978,
p. 446).

The inherent limitation to the number of things which the young child
can attend to (or hold in \"working memory\") at one time has important
implications for teaching. It means that the number of presentations and
the number of prompts which can be presented at one time, and still be
remembered by the learner, is extremely limited. With younger learners,
the most effective procedure is to prompt one response or step at a
time. With older learners it may be possible to prompt several steps at
one time. However, the number of steps which are prompted should not be
greater than the number of steps which the learner can \"hold in mind\"
at the one time.

Garry Margolius and Fred Sheffield refer to the number of steps which
the learner can hold in mind at one time as the learner\'s
*demonstration-assimilation span*. Margolius and Sheffield (1961)
suggest that, when teaching a new procedure (a skill which involves a
number of steps), the teacher should reduce the number of steps which
are prompted at one time until the learner is responding correctly at
least 75 per cent of the time. The size of the
demonstration-assimilation span will also vary with the extent to which
the learner has practised the new procedure. During the initial stages
of instruction in a new procedure, the demonstration-assimilation span
may need to be limited to two or three steps at a time. As the learner
begins to master some of the steps in the sequence of responses, the
demonstration-assimilation span can be increased.

Where the aim of instruction is to teach the correct responses to new
stimuli, the same rule holds. In teaching the names of the letters, for
example, the teacher should prompt the correct response to only one or
two unknown letters at a time before arranging for the learner to make
some kind of practice response or responses.
:::

::: referencesList
#### References

-   Case, R. (1978). A developmentally based theory and technology of
    instruction. Review of Educational Research, 48, 439-463.
-   Good, T. L. & Brophy, J. E. (1990). Educational psychology: A
    realistic approach (4th Ed.). New York: Longman.
-   Margolius, G. J. & Sheffield, F. D. (1961). Optimum methods of
    combining practice with filmed demonstration in teaching complex
    response sequences: Serial learning of a mechanical-assembly task.
    In R. C. Anderson, G. W. Faust, R. C. Roderick, D. J. Cunningham,
    & T. Andre (Eds.) Current research on instruction. Englewood Cliffs:
    Prentice Hall.
-   Miller, G. (1956). The magical number seven, plus or minus two: Some
    limits on our capacity for processing information. Psychological
    Review, 63, 81-97.
:::
