---
layout: default
title: "Content prerequisites and method prerequisites 
"
nav_order: Contentprerequisitesandmethodprerequisites
has_children: false
---
# Content prerequisites and method prerequisites 


::: documentByline
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
:::

::: {#parent-fieldname-text-cfb56f46db264bb195c60d79bd240f64}
Prerequisite skills can be grouped into two general categories: content
prerequisites and method prerequisites.

**Content prerequisite skills.** Content prerequisites are the
curriculum relevant skills and understandings which the current teaching
aim seeks to extend or to build upon. Content prerequisites are the
skills and understandings which the teaching aim presumes have now been
acquired by each student -- presumably because they have been taught at
some earlier point in the curriculum.

Content prerequisites exist in all curricula. Early reading instruction
assumes that the child has learned the meanings of each of the words
contained in early reading books. Later reading instruction assumes that
the child has learned to recognise all the common grapheme-phoneme
relations and can decode unknown words without assistance when he or she
comes across them. In maths, the content prerequisites are particularly
clear. If the teaching aim is to teach students how to add fractions,
the instruction will assume that the students can already add whole
numbers with a reasonable degree of accuracy. In science, content
prerequisites include an understanding of those simpler concepts which
must be understood if a new and more complex concept is to be
understood.

**Method prerequisite skills.** A second general class of prerequisite
skills are those which are presumed by the teaching method or learning
activity selected by the teacher. We will refer to these prerequisite
skills as *method prerequisites*. Method prerequisites change as the
teaching method (or type of learning activity) changes. Method
prerequisites change as the child progresses through the school system
and teachers begin to make assumptions about the degree of independence
which learners are able to take for their own learning.

Even on entry to school, teachers assume that new entrant children have
already learned to attend to teacher talk, to imitate teacher
demonstrations, to follow requests and instructions, to answer
questions, to seek help when needed, to keep a track of personal
equipment (such as pencils, rubbers, rulers etc.), to respond to
organisational signals, and so on. Joseph Cobb refers to these basic
method prerequisites as *academic survival skills* (Cobb & Hops, 1973;
Hops & Cobb, 1974)). These skills are essential for progress in school
because most school instruction involves showing, telling, or asking
questions and a child who has not yet learned to respond appropriately
to these events will profit little from learning activities which rely
on these kinds of events.

During the middle school years, teachers often make use of group and
co-operative group learning activities. This kind of learning activity
also assumes that each student has acquired certain method prerequisite
skills such as turn taking, staying on task, asking for help, and
remembering instructions which have been given some time earlier. A
child who has not yet acquired one or more of these skills will be
unable to profit from co-operative group work as a learning activity.

In the upper primary school, children are often set to work on learning
activities which involve various kinds of research and independent
study. Independent study assumes that the learner can locate books in a
library, can locate desired information in a book, can read with
reasonable speed, can read for information, can write reasonably well,
can make summary notes, and so on. A student who has yet to acquire any
of these method prerequisite skills will be unable to profit much from
learning activities which involve independent study.

Some method prerequisites are so important that they need to have been
mastered, that is, to have been practiced to a high level of fluency. A
learning activity which requires students to search out information on a
particular topic assumes that the learner can read and can read
sufficiently quickly to complete the task in the time allotted. A
learning activity which requires the learner to prepare a written report
on a particular topic assumes that the learner can write and spell and
can write sufficiently quickly to complete the report within the time
available. In these cases reading and writing are method prerequisites
because their mastery has been assumed by the learning activities
selected by the teacher.

The level of fluency which has been achieved with respect to method
prerequisites is a matter of some importance because it *sets an upper
limit on the number of practice responses which can be completed per
unit of time and, hence, on the rate of acquisition of new skills*.
Twice as many practice exercises can be completed by the child who can
write letters and numbers at the rate of 80 per minute as can be
completed by the child who is only able to write letters and numbers at
the rate of 40 per minute.
:::

::: referencesList
#### References

-   Cob, J. A., & Hops, H. (1973). Effects of academic survival skill
    training on low achievement first graders. Journal of Educational
    Research, 67, 108-113.
-   Hops, H., & Cobb, J. A. (1974). Initial investigations into academic
    survival-skill training, direct instruction, and first-grade
    achievement. Journal of Educational Psychology, 66, 548-553.
:::
