---
has_children: false
layout: default
nav_order: 2
title: 'Believability of the data collected by ethnographers '
---
# Believability of the data collected by ethnographers 


::: documentByline
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
:::

::: {#parent-fieldname-text-8efbec0172c04234ac7b003f52cfd7cd}
Qualitative researchers are concerned with data quality issues and these
are addressed in most qualitative methods texts. However, qualitative
researchers have yet to develop a common vocabulary for discussing data
quality issues and have yet to develop an agreed set of procedures for
ensuring the accuracy of the data contained in their reports or the
validity of the conclusions drawn from this data.

**Accuracy of the data collected**

The accuracy of the data contained in an ethnographic report is
variously referred to by ethnographers as its *confirmability* or
*credibility* (Guba & Lincoln, 1997; Mertens, 1998), its *reliability*
(Bogdan & Biklen, 1998), its *internal reliability* (LeCompte &
Preissle, 1993), its *descriptive validity* and *interpretive validity*
(Maxwell, 1992), its *trustworthiness* (Lincoln & Guba, 1985), and so
on. "The credibility test asks if there is a correspondence between the
way the respondents actually perceive social constructs and the way the
researcher portrays their viewpoints" (Mertens, 1998, p. 181).

Ethnographers usually seek to produce an account or portrayal which is
as accurate (as credible) as possible. "The ethnographer\'s primary
commitment is to a faithful and accurate rendition of the participant\'s
life ways" (LeCompte & Preissle, 1993, p. 354). Most recognise that the
accuracy of an account cannot be taken for granted. "Informants may lie,
omit relevant data, or misrepresent their claims" (LeCompte & Preissle,
1993, p. 345). Some also recognise that the investigator may not always
operate consistently and that, as a result, his or her records may not
always be reliable. "The naturalist is willing to concede what might be
called \'instrumental\' unreliability. . . . Humans do become careless;
there is \'instrumental decay\' such as fatigue; the human mind is
tentative and groping and makes mistakes" (Lincoln & Guba, 1985, p.
294).

The authors of qualitative methods texts suggest a variety of procedures
which should be used either singly or in combination in an attempt to
guard against inaccuracy. These include the following.

1\. *Prolonged engagement*. This involves spending sufficient time in
the setting of interest. This, it is claimed, gives the researcher time
to overcome his or her selective perceptions, to distinguish between the
typical and the atypical, and to develop a degree of trust sufficient to
ensure that repondents are responding honestly (Guba & Lincoln, 1997).
Prolonged engagement of course does nothing to guarantee that the
observer is making an accurate record of events.

2\. *The use of low inference descriptors*. This involves the reporting
of what the participants actually said and "descriptions phrased as
concretely and precisely as possible" (Le Compte & Preissle, 1993, p.
338).

3\. *The use of multiple researchers*. This is sometimes referred to as
multiplicative replication. "The optimum guard against threats to
internal reliability in ethnographic studies is the presence of multiple
researchers" (Le Compte & Preissle, 1993, p. 339). That fact that
several people produce much the same report certainly increases the
believability of data but it does not necessarily establish that the
report is accurate. A community of liars may produce closely similar
accounts. Kirk & Miller (1986, p. 47) give the example of a qualitative
study of workers in a massage parlour who, without exception, reported
that they did not provide "extras".

4\. *Structural corroboration*. This involves "gathering data or
information and using it to establish links that eventually create a
whole that is supported by the bits of evidence that constitute it"
(Eisner, 1979, p. 215). This procedure may produce a *coherent* account
but, as Phillips (1992) has noted, a coherent account is not necessarily
an accurate account. A liar may produce a coherent account.

5*. Referential adequacy*. This involves the production of a description
which enables the reader to see what the writer wants them to see. "The
problem here, of course, is that seeing what the critic or the
qualitative researcher is talking about, does not mean that the account
is *true*" (Phillips, 1992, p. 115). A liar may produce a convincing
account.

6\. *Participant corroboration.* Participant corroboration (also
referred to as member checking) involves taking the data and the
researcher\'s interpretations back to the informants and asking them
directly whether they find the researcher\'s account accurate. If the
account is an account of the attitudes, understandings or beliefs of the
participants, then the believability of that account will obviously be
enhanced if the participants confirm that their beliefs have been
accurately reported. If, however, the account is an account of events,
then the endorsement by participants of the account will not necessarily
provide confirmation of the accuracy of the account. "An account of a
classroom might be true even though the teacher (or the pupils) disagree
with it" (Phillips, 1992, p. 116).

7\. *Triangulation*. The main procedure which ethnographers are
counselled to use to ensure the accuracy of their accounts is the
procedure which they refer to as *triangulation*. "The anthropologist\'s
trade secret . . . is that he or she would never for a minute rely
solely on a single observation, a single instrument, a single approach.
The strength of fieldwork lies in its \'triangulation\', obtaining
information in many ways rather than relying solely on one" (Wolcott,
1988, p. 192). The ethnographer\'s concept of triangulation is similar
to the social scientist\'s concept of test-retest reliability and the
behaviour analyst\'s concept of inter-observer agreement. All require
two or more independent observations of the same phenomenon.

The central, unresolved problem with ethnographic accounts of
triangulation is that they fail to distinguish between different data
types (e.g. investigator observations, informant reports, investigator
recollections, informant recollections, investigator interpretations,
informant interpretations, and so on) and hence fail to consider the
question of what would count as adequate triangulation for data of each
of these different types. This is an extremely critical omission. It has
been repeatedly demonstrated by researchers working in a number of
different research traditions that there are many circumstances where
people do not or cannot accurately describe their beliefs, their
actions, or even what happened (Lloyd 1980/1994, 1994; Nisbett & Wilson,
1977; Schnelle, 1974; Steele, House & Kerins, 1971). Because qualitative
researchers have yet to consider what would be required to verify the
accuracy of each of these different data types, qualitative methods
texts provide no guidelines regarding either the actions which
researchers should take to guard against inaccuracy when collecting data
of each type or the procedures which researchers should use to assess
and report the accuracy of the verbal reports which they have collected.
One of the few exceptions is Guba & Lincoln (1989) who argue that
triangulation can only be used to check the accuracy of factual data.
Because each participant experiences their own reality, it cannot be
used to check the accuracy of reports of participant\'s perspectives.
For this, participant corroboration is required.

8*. Following the correct procedures*. A number of qualitative
researchers have argued that if certain data collection *procedures* are
used then this will guarantee an accurate data collection *result*. This
claim ignores the fact that, regardless of the observation procedure
which is used, there is always the possibility that the use of that
observation *procedure* may, under certain circumstances, produce an
inaccurate observation *result*. "It must be recognised that there are
*no* procedures that will regularly (or always) yield either sound data
or true conclusions" (Phillips, 1992, p. 117). "Doing something
correctly does not guarantee the outcome, as all good cooks, poets, and
golfers can attest" (LeCompte & Preissle, 1993, p. 329). Using the
correct interview procedure to interview a liar (e.g. interviewing the
liar twice) will not necessarily result in an accurate account of the
events described by the liar.

All of these procedures are procedures which researchers are counselled
to employ in their attempts to ensure that the data which is being
collected is accurate data. Qualitative researchers have yet to develop
any procedures for *evaluating* the reliability of their observation
procedures or the accuracy of the data which is being or has been
collected.

It is possible to get the report of a qualitative investigation
published even although that report contains no data quality
information. In fact, the great majority of qualitative reports contain
no information at all about the reliability or accuracy of the data
contained in the report.

**Validity of conclusions which are being drawn from the data**

Most qualitative researchers realise that the validity of their
conclusions (their believability) is a matter of some importance.
Erickson (1986), for example, identifies the following threats to
validity: (a) insufficient evidence to justify the key assertions, (b)
insufficient variety in the different types of evidence, (c) an
insufficient understanding of the actors perspectives to accurately
interpret their actions, (d) an inadequate search for disconfirming
evidence, and (e) an inadequate analysis of discrepant cases. Although
ignored by Erickson, most serious threat to the validity of an
ethnographic account is selection bias. This is because an ethnographic
account is always a selective account. Even the most highly skilled
observer can only record some of what is happening. The rest must be
left out. "Qualitative observation involves knowing what to leave out"
(Eisner, 1991, p. 34). Because ethnographic *recording* is selective,
two different observers may provide quite different descriptions of the
events occurring in a particular setting simply because they have
elected to include different events in their data. Furthermore, most
qualitative researchers "collect . . . more data than they can ever
analyze" (Bogdan & Biklen, 1992, p. 68). Because ethnographic
*reporting* is always selective, two researchers could easily produce
two quite different analyses of the same data set and two quite
different research reports simply because they elected to include
different parts of the data set in their reports.

Textbooks on qualitative research tend to argue that selection bias can
be minimised by the inclusion of all of the data which has been
collected, by negative case analysis, and by the use of peer review.

1.*The inclusion of all data.* With rare exceptions (e.g. Nuthall,
1999), ethnographers do not normally record everything which happens
during the fieldwork period. Observations are a sample of the
observations which might have been made and interviews are a sample of
the interviews which might have been conducted. However, simply
providing a detailed description of the sampling procedures employed (as
is counselled in most qualitative methods texts) provides no safeguard
against selection bias. The only real safeguard against selection bias
is to record everything. This is because, where the subject matter is
learning, every single learning interaction has the potential to affect
learning. Valid conclusions regarding relationships between experience
and learning become possible only if the ethnographer records every
single learning interaction.

2.*Negative case analysis* involves revisiting and revising emerging
hypotheses until they account for most, or all cases. Guba & Lincoln
(1989) argue that assertions should be revised until they account for "a
reasonable number" of cases. Erickson (1986) argues that assertions
should be revised until they account for all cases.

3.*Peer review* involves exposing one\'s emerging hypotheses to the
scrutiny of an informed peer. This process "helps keep the inquirer
\'honest\', exposing him or her to searching questions by an experienced
protagonist doing his or her best to play the devil\'s advocate"
(Lincoln & Guba, 1985, p. 308). Mertens refers to this as the
*confirmability audit* where the researcher\'s peers "review field
notes, interview transcripts, and so on and determine if the conclusions
are supported by the data" (Mertens, 1998, p. 184).

**Evaluation of the quality assurance procedures used by qualitative
researchers**

Evaluating the data quality assurance procedures of the qualitative
researcher is a particularly difficult task for a number of reasons.
First, qualitative researchers do not use a common language in their
discussions of data quality issues. Secondly, qualitative researchers
take a variety of positions with respect to data quality issues with
some (e.g. Smith, 1984) arguing that the interpretivist assumption
precludes the development of common standards for evaluating qualitative
studies and others (e.g. Kirk & Miller, 1986) arguing that data quality
is just as important in qualitative research as it is in any other kind
of research. Thirdly, qualitative researchers disagree amongst
themselves with respect to the procedures which should be used to ensure
data quality and routinely ignore the procedures which should be
employed to *evaluate* the quality of the data collected. Fourthly,
qualitative researchers such as Eisner, and Lincoln and Guba, who have
written on data quality issues, do not recommend a single set of
procedures - their recommendations have tended to evolve and change with
the passage of time.

Qualitative researchers do not routinely assess the reliability of their
observational procedures or the credibility (accuracy) of the data which
these procedures generate and, in fact, disagree amongst themselves as
to how either of these goals might be achieved. Individual studies are
almost never replicated so the qualitative literature includes no data
which could be used to evaluate the reliability of the procedures which
are being used and no information regarding the generality of the
conclusions which are being drawn from each study.

It can be seen, therefore, that the data quality assurance procedures of
the qualitative researcher are particularly weak - much weaker than the
procedures used by either behaviour analysts or cognitive scientists.
Qualitative researchers collect weak data (e.g. data which includes
recollections and retrospective accounts) - the very kinds of data for
which quality assurance procedures are most needed. They tend to work
holistically which means that the risk of bias (unrepresentativeness) is
greater in a qualitative study than in any other kind of study.
Qualitative researchers tend to work alone which precludes the use of
any kind of inter-observer agreement procedure which might be used to
assess or to demonstrate observer reliability. And they have developed
no agreed procedures *either* for ensuring *or* for assessing the
accuracy of the data which they are collecting and reporting.
Qualitative researchers tend to work in single sites thus ruling out the
possibility of any kind of replication across sites - the one procedure
which might be used to assess the reliability of any assertions,
generalisations, or conclusions which are being drawn.

The suggestion by some qualitative researchers (e.g. Eisner, 1991;
Smith, 1984) that conventional notions of reliability, accuracy, and
representativeness should not be applied to qualitative research reports
is particularly worrisome because, should this view become widespread,
it would remove qualitative investigations from the class of activities
which we commonly refer to as research. If there are no agreed criteria
for evaluating the accuracy of the ethnographer\'s report then, of
course, the ethnographer\'s report can never be said to be either
accurate (true) or inaccurate (false) and it can make no contribution to
our evolving understanding of how learning and teaching processes
operate. If there is no way of demonstrating the accuracy of the data in
a research report, then no implications for policy or practice can
follow from that data. The report is more like a novel, a poem, or a
piece of music - enjoyable, insightful and stimulating but not something
from which any kind of new knowledge, prediction, or practical
implication can be derived.
:::

::: referencesList
#### References

-   Bogdan, R. C., & Biklen, S. K. (1992). Qualitative research for
    education: An introduction to theory and methods (2nd ed.). Boston:
    Allyn and Bacon.
-   Eisner, E. W. (1979). The educational imagination. New York:
    Macmillan.
-   Eisner, E. W. (1991). The enlightened eye: Qualitative inquiry and
    the enhancement of educational practice. New York: Macmillan
    Publishing Co.
-   Erickson, F. (1986). Qualitative methods in research on teaching.
    In M. C. Wittrock (Ed.), Handbook of research on teaching (3rd ed.,
    pp. 119-161). New York: Macmillan.
-   Guba, E. G., & Lincoln, Y. S. (1997). Naturalistic and rationalistic
    enquiry. In J.P. Keeves (Ed.), Educational research, methodology,
    and measurement: An international handbook (2nd ed., pp. 86-90).
    Oxford, England: Pergamon/Elsevier Science Inc.
-   Guba, E. G., & Lincoln, Y. S. (1989). Fourth generation evaluation.
    Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
-   Kirk, J., & Miller, M. L. (1986). Reliability and validity in
    qualitative research. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage Publications.
-   LeCompte, M. D., & Preissle, J. (1993). Ethnography and qualitative
    design in educational research (2nd ed.). San Diego, CA: Academic
    Press.
-   Lincoln, Y. S., & Guba, E. G. (1985). Naturalistic inquiry. Beverly
    Hills, CA: Sage Publications.
-   Lloyd, K. E. (1980/1994). Do as I say, not as I do. The Behavior
    Analyst, 17, 131-139.
-   Lloyd, K. E. (1994). Addenda. The Behavior Analyst, 17, 141-144.
-   Maxwell, J. A. (1992). Understanding validity in qualitative
    research. Harvard Educational Review, 62, 279-300.
-   Mertens, D. M. (1998). Research methods in education and psychology:
    Integrating diversity with quantitative and qualitative approaches.
    Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
-   Nisbett, R. E., & Wilson, T. D. (1977). Telling more than we can
    know: Verbal reports of mental processes. Psychological Review, 84,
    231-259.
-   Nuthall, G. A. (1999). The way students learn: Acquiring knowledge
    from an integrated science and social studies unit. Elementary
    School Journal, 99, 303-341.
-   Phillips, D. C. (1992). The social scientist\'s bestiary: A guide to
    fabled threats to, and defences of, naturalistic social science.
    Oxford, England: Pergamon Press.
-   Schnelle, J. F. (1974). A brief report on invalidity of parent
    evaluations of behavior change. Journal of Applied Behavior
    Analysis, 7, 341-343.
-   Smith, J. K. (1984). The problem of criteria for judging
    interpretive inquiry. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 6,
    379-391
-   Steele, J. M., House, E. R., & Kerins, T. (1971). An instrument for
    assessing instructional climate through low-inference student
    judgements. American Educational Research Journal, 9, 197-207.
-   Wolcott, H. F. (1988). Ethnographic research in education. In R. M.
    Jaeger (Ed.), Complementary methods for research in education (pp.
    185-206). Washington, DC: American Educational Research Association.
:::
