---
has_children: false
layout: default
nav_order: 1
title: 'Do behaviour analysts explore the generalisability of their experimental findings? '
---
# Do behaviour analysts explore the generalisability of their experimental findings? 


::: documentByline
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
:::

::: {#parent-fieldname-text-af6066077fe141b09f94109bb1f50df9}
Behaviour analysts have very little interest in the observation and
description of particulars. They are primarily interested in
generalisations. Behaviour analysts use the term *generality* to refer
to the generalisability of their experimental findings. "Generality
refers to universality or replicability. . . . A broad statement of the
question raised by generality is, \'If I take part or all of the
procedures that produced a result and apply them under circumstances
that are in some degree different, will I get the same kind of
effect?\'" (Johnston & Pennypacker, 1993b, p. 177).

Behaviour analysts have written at length about generality and
distinguish between many different kinds of generality. (See, for
example, Johnston & Pennypacker, 1993a). A set of experimental results
may have generality across different species, across different learners,
across different response classes (behaviours), across different kinds
of curriculum content, across different settings or contexts, across
time, and so on. A set of experimental results may also indicate that a
particular variable or class of events (such as a demonstration, or an
error correction procedure) has a certain degree of generality across
behaviours or individuals, or that a particular process (such as
reinforcement or extinction) has a certain degree of generality across
behaviours or individuals, or that a particular procedure (such as a
good behaviour chart or the withdrawal of a privilege) has a certain
degree of generality across behaviours or individuals, and so on.

Behaviour analysts argue that a single experiment can never provide any
information regarding the generality of the effect which has been
observed. "Regardless of how a study is conducted, it is impossible to
know the range of conditions under which its results can be reproduced.
The only way that this range can be determined is though a series of
systematic replications of the original study" (Poling, Methot & LeSage,
1995, p. 29). In a systematic replication the independent and dependent
variables are similar to those of earlier investigations but differ in
at least one aspect - the one which is of interest as far as generality
is concerned.

An understanding of the generality of a particular variable, process, or
procedure emerges slowly. This is because many dozens of investigations
must be completed before even an outline emerges of the conditions under
which a given effect will and will not occur. "External validity is not
a property of studies, but a process in which consumers of research
interact with research findings" (Blampied, 1999, p. 100).

Behaviour analysts are interested in generality because, as our
understanding of the generality of particular variables and processes
increases, we are able to make increasingly accurate predictions with
respect to the effects of new procedures and the effects of old
procedures in new contexts.

The within-subject research procedures of the behaviour analyst have
been criticised by social science researchers as lacking in
generalisability (because the results of a single within-subject
experiment cannot be generalised to any population of learners).
However, it is important to note that a between-groups investigation is
also lacking in this kind of generalisability because its results cannot
be generalised to any individual learner. Behaviour analysts argue that,
when it comes to the study of teaching and learning, establishing
generalisability across individual learners and settings is more
important than establishing generalisability from samples to
populations, that this can only be established by systematic
replication, and that this is the case regardless of whether one is
engaged in within-subject experimentation or between-groups
experimentation.
:::

::: referencesList
#### References

-   Blampied, N. M. (1999). A legacy neglected: Restating the case for
    single-case research in cognitive-behaviour therapy. Behaviour
    Change, 16, 89-104
-   Johnston, J. M., & Pennypacker, H. S. (1993a). Strategies and
    tactics of behavioral research (2nd ed.). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
    Erlbaum Associates.
-   Johnston, J. M., & Pennypacker, H. S. (1993b). Readings for
    strategies and tactics of behavioral research (2nd ed.). Hillsdale,
    NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
-   Poling, A., Methot, L. L., & LeSage, M. G. (1995). Fundamentals of
    behavior analytic research. New York: Plenum Press.
:::
