# The fluency building phase \n

::: documentByline
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
:::

::: {#parent-fieldname-text-9a27308d56a540cb994c9a588a4f88d2}
Even after students have learned how to respond correctly, we often
provide additional practice to bring them to the point where they can
respond fluently, that is, both correctly and quickly. Fluent
performance is necessary in most real-life situations and a functional
level of fluency is an expected learning outcome with respect to almost
all of the basic academic skills taught at school. Reading skills are of
no use unless the child can read quickly enough to make sense of what is
being read, writing skills are of little use until the child can write
at a reasonable speed, musical performance skills are of little use
until the learner can play quickly enough to keep up with the other
players.

The fluency building phase involves a change from slow but correct
responding to fast and correct responding. The end of the fluency
building phase is marked by a level of correct responding which is as
fast as that demonstrated by learners who have mastered the skill in
question.

The development of mastery is referred to using a variety of names.
Educators often talk about skills which have been "memorised" or
"over-learned". Cognitive scientists talk about the development of
"automaticity" and long term "retention". Neuroscientists talk about the
development of "reflexive memory". Behavioural scientists talk about
functional levels of fluency. In this account, will use the term
*mastery* to refer to a level of competence where the behaviour of
interest can be performed sufficiently accurately and sufficiently
quickly for it to be of use in most of those settings where it will need
to be used. In general, the ability to begin responding in less than 1
second is considered to be a functional level of fluency since it is
this level of recall speed which predicts long term retention.

The measurement of improvements in fluency requires a short test which
can be administered on a day to day basis. The test must be a timed
test. For many new behaviours such as naming, reading, calculating and
so on, an accurate estimate of fluency level can be obtained using a
1-minute test. In the case of reading, running records of oral reading
can be timed to provide a measure of the number of words read correctly
per minute. In the case of writing, the time taken to complete the
writing task can be recorded so that the number of words written
correctly per minute can be calculated. In the case of keyboarding,
fluency can be measured by recording the number of characters, or the
number of words, correctly typed per minute. In the case of new
procedures and operations, improvements in fluency are normally measured
by measuring the length of time which the learner requires in order to
complete the procedure correctly. For example, improvements in the
bed-making skills of a trainee nurse might be measured by recording the
time taken to complete this task to a predetermined standard.

One of the reasons why we have chosen to use the term *fluency* rather
than the term "automaticity" is because we have accurate and widely used
measures of fluency whereas those who use the term automaticity have yet
to develop a practical method for measuring level of automaticity which
is simple enough for use in the classroom. Measures of fluency provide a
much more sensitive measure of learning than do measures of accuracy
(that is, measures of correct performance). This is because accurate
responding may be achieved very quickly (in three or four trials)
whereas improvements in fluency continue to occur long after 100 per
cent accuracy has been achieved.

Teachers are often interested in the question of whether or not a
student has remembered a recently taught skill or understanding. This
dimension of performance is most commonly measured by returning after a
period of non-use of the skill and administering a test of retention.
This is a relatively time-consuming way of measuring retention and
clearly is not a procedure which teachers can use to make decisions
about whether or not further practice needs to be provided. Fortunately
we now know that retention tests are unnecessary in most situations.
This is because once a response has been sufficiently well practised to
ensure that it can be recalled in less than a second, there is an
extremely high probability (approaching 100 per cent) that the response
will be remembered for many months, if not for a lifetime. This being
the case, it is normally sufficient simply to measure fluency to see if
the targeted response can be recalled in less than 1 second. If this
outcome is achieved, the later retention test will prove to be
unnecessary and can be abandoned.
:::
