---
layout: default
title: "Prompt fading procedures 
"
nav_order: Promptfadingprocedures
has_children: false
---
# Prompt fading procedures 


::: documentByline
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
:::

::: {#parent-fieldname-text-cea34b0f34d34c6db92cea1320df1624}
The task of withdrawing any prompts which have been used during the
initial phase of learning is referred to as *fading*. Fading is an
essential teaching process during transition from the initial learning
phase to the independence phase of learning any new skill. There are a
number of different ways of fading prompts during the initial
acquisition phase and there is a body of research regarding the
effectiveness of each of these fading procedures. It follows, therefore,
that the ability to identify different kinds of prompt fading procedures
is an important skill for both teachers and teaching researchers.

**Delayed prompting.** The *delayed prompting procedure* introduces a
prompt delay interval (a pause) between the presentation of the practice
stimulus (the question, exercise, or instruction to perform) and the
presentation of the prompt. This provides an opportunity for the learner
to respond without assistance if they are able to. Only if the student
responds incorrectly (or does not respond at all within the delay
interval) is assistance provided (usually in the form of a strong
prompt). Initially, the learner is unable to respond, so most responses
are prompted. During the later phases of instruction, most responses are
correct so prompts occur only following errors. As the number of errors
declines, so too does the number of prompts until, eventually, no
further prompts are required.

The delayed prompting procedure for fading prompts has several different
names: time-delay, time delayed prompting, progressive delay, and
delayed prompting. This account uses the term *delayed prompting.*

For teachers, waiting before prompting is the easiest of the fading
procedures to use correctly. This is because the student's performance
determines whether or not a prompt should be used.

**Increasing assistance.** With increasing assistance, the teacher
begins each learning interaction with a weak prompt and, if this does
not work to prompt the correct response, the teacher introduces stronger
and stronger prompts until the learner responds correctly. The
increasing assistance procedure can often be observed in the classroom.
Teachers often use it during early reading instruction, for example. If
a novice reader is reading an instructional text and comes to a word
which they cannot read, the teacher may prompt the correct word by
directing the reader\'s attention to the meaning of the sentence (a weak
prompt) and, if this doesn\'t work, by pointing the reader\'s attention
to the shape of the word and, if this doesn\'t work, by telling the word
(a strong prompt).

The increasing assistance procedure is also known as graduated
prompting*.* The rationale for the increasing assistance procedure is
similar to the rationale for delayed prompting. Each practice trial
begins with the opportunity to respond following presentation of the
weakest prompt. (This is the situation most similar to independent
performance.) Only if the student is unable to respond does the teacher
resort to stronger prompts. As the learner becomes more skilled, fewer
and fewer strong prompts are required, that is, the use of strong
prompts is faded as soon as the learner is able to perform without them.

This is a more difficult procedure for teachers to master. This is
because a great deal of experience is required in deciding upon the
strength of the initial prompt. Inexperienced teachers frequently start
with a much weaker prompt than the student actually requires in order to
respond correctly and this error results in many unnecessary errors.

**Decreasing assistance.** With decreasing assistance, the level of
assistance provided by the teacher is gradually reduced over successive
practice attempts. During early practice trials the teacher provides
explicit directions regarding what to do. During subsequent learning
trials, the teacher provides less and less assistance. In other words,
the teacher starts with detailed or strong prompts and moves to fewer or
weaker prompts once the learner begins to respond correctly.

This is the most commonly used of all fading procedures. For example,
the teacher might introduce a new procedure (such as the long
multiplication procedure) with an explicit show and tell demonstration
(detailed prompting), review the procedure in a more abbreviated form
the next day (reduced prompting) and, during subsequent practice of the
procedure, cease to provide any reminders regarding how to perform the
procedure (no prompting).
:::
