---
grand_parent: 'Functional sequences of learning interactions '
great_grand_parent: 'Important learning and teaching events '
great_great_grand_parent: 'Teacher Education''s Core Knowledge and Skills.'
has_children: false
layout: default
nav_order: 2
parent: 'Prompting and prompt fading sequences '
title: 'The prompt delay interval '
---
# The prompt delay interval


```yaml
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
```


It is possible to present the practice stimulus and then to immediately
follow this with the prompt. This technique is often referred to as
*simultaneous prompting.* If a practice stimulus is presented, and then
*immediately* followed by a prompt, the learner will be deprived of the
opportunity to respond without prompting (if they are able to do so). In
addition, the teacher will be unable to tell whether or not the learner
has reached the point where they can respond without assistance. For
this reason, teachers normally present the practice stimulus or question
and then wait for a brief interval before providing the prompt. In this
account we will refer to the interval of time which occurs between the
presentation of a practice stimulus and the presentation of a prompt as
*the prompt-delay interval*.

Some writers use the term "wait time" but the term "wait time" refers to
the period of time which the teacher allows to elapse between the asking
of a question (in a classroom lesson) and the act of indicating who may
respond to that question. So it can be seen that "wait time" is not the
same as the prompt-delay interval.

The prompt-delay interval may vary from a fraction of a second to
several seconds. Since one of the aims of instruction is always to bring
the learner to the point where they can respond independently (that is,
respond without prompting), it follows that the prompt-delay interval
should be sufficient to allow the learner to respond without prompting
if they are now able to do so. Given that responding during the early
stages of instruction may be quite slow and hesitant, it follows that
the prompt-delay interval may need to be several seconds long (3 to 5
seconds long) if it is to provide the learner with the opportunity to
respond independently.
