---
grand_parent: 'Teacher Education''s Core Knowledge and Skills.'
has_children: true
layout: default
nav_order: 1
parent: 'The problem to be solved '
title: 'The move from craft to evidence-based practice '
---
# The move from craft to evidence-based practice

The basic structure of teacher-student interaction and the teaching
activities which occur in classrooms have changed little during the past
80 years -- a fact which has been documented many times (e.g. Hoetker &
Ahlbrand, 1969; Cuban, 1993; Cuban & Tyack, 1995; Nuthall, 2007).
Compare this with the very considerable scientific and technological
advances which have occurred in almost all other professions during the
20th century. Unlike medical practice, where the traditional craft
philosophy of patient care was gradually replaced by the revolutionary
new clinical science during the first half of the 20th Century (Le Fanu,
1999), teaching practice has remained, to this day, a craft largely
untouched by the scientific research on learning and teaching.

### **A very short history of scientific progress in medicine**

Douglas Carnine, who has spent most of his working life engaged in
scientific research into teaching, has written a provocative article
entitled *Why education experts resist effective practices (And what it
would take to make education more like medicine)* (Carnine, 2000). In
this article Carnine observed that teacher educators have much to learn
from the way in which medicine, pharmacology, and various other
professions have evolved into mature professions. Carnine quotes the
medical historian Lewis Thomas who has written of pre-scientific
medicine that

"It is hard to conceive of a less scientific enterprise among human
endeavours. Virtually anything that could be thought up for treatment
was tried out at one time or another, and, once tried, lasted decades or
even centuries before being given up. It was, in retrospect, the most
frivolous and irresponsible kind of human experimentation, based on
nothing but trial and error, and usually resulting in precisely that
sequence. Bleeding, cupping, the administration of infusions of every
known plant, solutions of every known metal, most of these based on the
weirdest imaginings about the cause of disease, concocted out of nothing
but thin air --Â this was the heritage of medicine up until a little over
a century ago. It is astounding that the profession survived so long,
and got away with so much with so little outcry. Almost everyone seems
to have been taken in (Thomas, 1979, p. 159).

During the 20th century, however, medicine gradually transformed itself
into a mature, evidence-based profession with the result that life
expectancy across the Western world rose from less than 50 years to more
than 75 years.

In part this transformation was fuelled by scientific discoveries which,
following the second world war, began flowing out of medical
laboratories as if medical scientists "had hit the jackpot (which they
had)" (Le Fanu, 1999, p xv). Some of the discoveries which had far
reaching effects included the discovery of penicillin and many other
antibiotics, the discovery of cortisone and the various steroid
therapies, the discovery of streptomycin and a cure for tuberculosis,
the development of a vaccination for polio, the treatment of
hypertension and the prevention of strokes, the development of cancer
screening tests, the discovery of heliobacter and the development of a
cure for peptic ulcers, and so on.

In part this transformation was fuelled by technological developments
such as the development of x-ray machines, CT scanners, ultrasound
scanners, the electrocardiogram, the pump, the operating microscope, the
endoscope, the ventilator, the kidney dialysis machine, the pacemaker,
general anaesthesia, hip replacement surgery, kidney transplants, heart
surgery, interoccular lens implants, cochlear implants, intensive care
medicine, and so on.

In part, and most importantly of all, the transformation involved the
gradual replacement of pre-scientific medical practice with the new
clinical science in which medical practitioners not only adopted the
diagnostic and treatment procedures flowing out of the medical
laboratories but also reported the results of their own careful
observations and clinical trials. "Research of any sort is never easy
but for these doctors to undertake these studies alongside their primary
responsibility of looking after patients suggested a certain zeal and
desire for knowledge. This zeal is the defining characteristic of the
new ideology -- clinical science -- that was to transform medicine" (Le
Fanu, 1999, p. 198).

Hollman, describing the life of Sir Thomas Lewis describes just how
revolutionary the new clinical science was at the time. "He had a
passionate belief that clinical science was just as good as any other
science, and it would be established as a University discipline ... one
has to remember that in the 1930s in Britain, the concept of a full-time
life-long career in clinical research was ... regarded rather as a
refuge for those unable to withstand the strains of a consultant's life"
(Hollman, 1994). Yet in the 10 years following the end of World War 2
"the situation where research was regarded as a refuge for those unable
to withstand the strains of consultant's life was completely reversed"
and people began to make their reputations by publishing the results of
clinical investigations (Le Fanu, 1999, p. 203).

Medicine, says Carnine, now qualifies as a mature profession. "A mature
profession ... is characterised by a shift from judgements of individual
experts to judgements constrained by quantified data that can be
inspected by a broad audience, less emphasis on personal trust and more
on objectivity, and a greater role for standardized measures and
procedures informed by scientific investigations that use control
groups" (Carnine, 2000, p. 9).

### A very short history of scientific progress in teaching

Educational researchers have been studying learning and teaching for
more than 100 years -- since Edgar Rice's 1895 study of the effects of
time spent on spelling practice (Nuthall, 2005). In a century of
unprecedented scientific and technological development, classroom
practice has hardly changed at all. By and large, it remains much the
same as it was 100 years ago (Cuban, 1993).

"The scientific revolution that utterly transformed medicine,
agriculture, transportation, technology, and other fields in the 20th
century almost completely bypassed the field of education. If Rip Van
Winkle had been a physician, a farmer or an engineer, he would be
unemployable if he awoke today. If he had been a good elementary school
teacher in the 19th century, he would probably be a good elementary
school teacher today" (Slavin, 2002).

Notwithstanding 100 years of effort, educators have yet to accomplish
the task of teaching every non-brain-damaged child how to read the
newspaper, how to write a simple descriptive essay, how to perform the
main types of arithmetic calculations, and how to behave in ways which
will keep them out of prison. It other words, teaching practice has much
in common with the medical practice of 100 years ago (Carnine, 2000).

Teachers still routinely assign children to each day\'s learning
activities without any diagnostic testing of the child to determine just
exactly what it is that the child needs to learn next (Nuthall, 2007).
Imagine a medical practitioner placing each day's patients on a course
of treatment without any attempt at a diagnosis to determine exactly
what course of treatment those patients required.

Teachers are still required to make most of their own teaching materials
and tests (Twyman, Layng, Stikeleather & Hobbins, 2005). Imagine a
surgeon being required to manufacture all the instruments, drips, pumps,
anaesthetics, scalpels, clamps, needles and so on required for the next
day's procedures at home the night before.

School textbooks and materials which have never been evaluated to see if
they work for anyone are still purchased by schools and routinely used
by teachers (Carnine & Bean, 1994; Engelmann, 1992; Grossen & Romance,
1994). Imagine a medical practitioner prescribing a course of treatment
which had never by subjected to a single clinical trial and never
approved by the Federal Drug Administration or any similar body. "It is
. . . amazing to realize that publishers, test makers, and reformers of
every color and stripe can "sell" their wares without prior piloting or
evaluation" (Lagemann, 2000, p. 238).

Teachers still get paid for doing what they do, that is, keeping
children engaged and occupied, and not for ensuring that children learn
(Nuthall, 2005, 2007). No teacher is ever likely to be dismissed because
some of her students did not learn very much. When a child fails to
learn this is still routinely assumed to be because of some defect in
the child, not some defect in the teaching provided. Imagine a medical
practitioner arguing in front of the Medical Council that his or her
patient died because the patient lacked the ability to profit from the
treatment provided.

Teacher educators still get paid for turning out graduates who behave
like the teachers who went before them, not for turning out graduates
who have demonstrated that they can produce learning (Kennedy, 1991;
Meier, 1992). In this respect Colleges of Education have more in common
with Theological Colleges than they do with Medical Schools.

Clearly classroom practice is not an evidence-based practice in the same
way that clinical medicine is an evidence-based practice and teaching is
not a mature profession in the way that medicine is a mature profession.
Teaching is still a craft. Unlike medical practice where the traditional
craft philosophy of patient care was gradually replaced by the
revolutionary new clinical science during the first 70 years of the 20th
century, teaching practice has remained, to this day, a craft largely
untouched by the scientific research on learning and teaching. It fact,
one could almost say that teaching practice is a bit like the practice
described in the anonymous observation:

\"Theory is when you know why it doesn\'t work.

Practice is when it works but you don\'t know why.

We combine theory and practice.

It doesn\'t work and we don\'t know why.\"
