---
layout: default
title: "Questions which can and cannot be addressed by behaviour analysis methods 
"
nav_order: Questionswhichcanandcannotbeaddressedbybehaviouranalysismethods
has_children: false
---
# Questions which can and cannot be addressed by behaviour analysis methods 


::: documentByline
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
:::

::: {#parent-fieldname-text-016768dec73242beb066a24a1c789b4c}
Unlike the social science procedures, behaviour analysis research
procedures were specifically designed to study behaviour change
(learning) in individual learners. At the present time, therefore, it is
clearly the method of choice for the researcher who seeks to answer
questions about changes over time in the motivation, performance,
language use, competence, understandings, feelings, or beliefs of
individual children and adults.

Secondly, the direct observation and functional analysis procedures
developed by behaviour analysts are the appropriate procedures to use
when seeking the answer to diagnostic questions such as why a particular
individual is behaving in a particular way, or having difficulty in
mastering a particular new skill or understanding, or failing to make
the progress which is expected, or feeling unmotivated, or experiencing
debilitating levels of anxiety in certain situations, and so on.

Behaviour analytic observation procedures are the most appropriate
procedures to use when monitoring or measuring the rate of progress of
individual learners towards a particular teaching or therapeutic goal.
This kind of information is often needed by parents, teachers and
therapists who must make decisions about whether a particular teaching
procedure or programme is working and, if not, whether it should be
changed and, if so, how it should be changed. This kind of information
is also essential for the teacher or student teacher who seeks to engage
in reflective practice. Without an accurate knowledge of what individual
children have and have not learned as a result of a teaching activity
there is nothing to reflect upon.

Fourthly, the within-subject experimental procedures of the behaviour
analyst are the research procedures which are most likely to make a
contribution to our developing understanding of the factors upon which
motivation, attitude, learning and retention depend. They are the
research procedures of choice for any teacher, teacher educator, or
researcher who is interested in questions about whether a given kind of
experience or teaching variable has a particular kind of effect on
motivation or learning and, if so, the conditions under which this is
the case. In other words, behaviour analysis research procedures are the
most appropriate procedures for measuring the relative effectiveness of
particular teaching procedures in assisting particular types of learners
to achieve particular kinds of learning outcomes.

Behaviour analysis research methods were developed by researchers who
were interested in meeting conventional scientific standards of data
accuracy and reproducibility. So they are the research methods of choice
for the scientific study of how and when learning occurs. This includes
questions about the conditions which are necessary in order for a
particular kind of learning to occur and questions about the generality
of previously discovered environment-behaviour and teaching-learning
relationships.

As with any research method there are, of course, many questions which
cannot be studied using the single case, time series research procedures
of behaviour analysis. These procedures cannot be used to find the
answer to epidemiological or prevalence questions, they cannot be used
for large scale programme evaluations, and they have not been designed
to provide in-depth descriptions of the activities, beliefs and social
conventions of those who live, work, or learn together in a particular
setting.
:::
