---
grand_parent: 'Learning processes, learning outcomes and phases of learning '
great_grand_parent: 'Important learning and teaching events '
great_great_grand_parent: 'Teacher Education''s Core Knowledge and Skills.'
has_children: false
layout: default
nav_order: 4
parent: 'Basic types of acquisition outcomes '
title: 'The acquisition of new equivalence relations '
---
# The acquisition of new equivalence relations


```yaml
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
```


Let us say that we want a young child to learn the names of the letters
of the alphabet. Note how ambiguous this statement is. We probably
won\'t need to teach *saying the names* because the child can already
pronounce each of the names when prompted to do so. However, the child
will have to learn *how to respond to each of the letters with the
correct letter name*. In order to describe this kind of learning task we
have to specify *both (a) the form of the stimulus* or symbol which we
want the learner to respond to correctly *and (b) the correct response*
to that stimulus. Note that even the phrase "correct response" is a
short hand. It is a short hand way of saying "responds to each stimulus
in the same way that adult users of the language respond."

Notice that this kind of acquisition outcome has two defining elements:

1.The task facing the learner is that of learning to respond correctly
to a symbol or other kind of stimulus (e.g. the letter b or the printed
word bat).

2.The stimulus always takes much the same form. The word bat always
contains the same three letters in the same order. And the response must
match the stimulus exactly. The only reading response which qualifies as
"correct" is saying the word "bat".

This kind of learning goes by a wide variety of different names. To
avoid confusion, we will refer to it by its technical name "the
acquisition of new equivalence relations". With this kind of acquisition
outcome, what has to be learned is a stimulus--\>response equivalence
relation, rather than how to perform a response. In fact, this kind of
learning is usually postponed until the learner has already acquired the
ability to perform the response (e.g. pronounce the word "bat").

Because we expect children to learn to both read and to write (and to
understand what they are reading and writing), the equivalence relations
which are involved in language learning do not come in pairs, they come
in sets -- as shown in the following example (learning to use the word
"scissors").

![Figure 2134. The three pairs of equivalence relations for the word
\"scissors\".](../../../../../../assets/images/TECKSFig2134.png "Figure 2134. The three pairs of equivalence relations for the word "scissors"."){: .image-inline}

*Figure 2134. The three pairs of equivalence relations for the word
\"scissors\".*

As can be seen from the table there are three basic pairs of equivalence
relations: #1 & #2 comprehending the orally spoken word (and vice
versa), #3 & #4 reading the written word (and vice versa) and #5 & #6
comprehending the written word (and vice versa). Relations #4 and #6
will later become writing (writing the correct word rather than just
selecting it).

Because children must master both oral and written language, this kind
of learning outcome is an extremely common kind of learning outcome. We
expect children to learn many hundreds of thousands of
stimulus-\>response equivalences. We expect children to learn the names
of hundreds of people and the names of thousands of common objects. We
expect children to learn the names of the letters, the names of the
numerals, and the names of many other symbols such as +, -, x, รท. We
expect children to learn to read many thousands of printed words, and we
expect children to learn to write (that is, to correctly spell) a high
proportion of the words which they can read. The learning of equivalence
relations is not confined to the early years. We expect the student of
music to learn to read musical scores, the student of chemistry to learn
to read a large number of chemical symbols, and the student of maths to
learn to read and understand a large number of mathematical symbols.

Because stimulus--\>response relations often come in sets (such as the
52 letters of the alphabet), the learner must learn to discriminate
between each of the stimuli in the set as well as learning to respond
differently and correctly to each. This poses a number of unique
difficulties in the teaching of this kind of skill. For example, one of
the critical shortcomings of school curricula is that they point to many
thousands of equivalence relations but simply fail to list the specific
equivalence relations (e.g. the specific sight words, spelling words,
and so on) which each child is expected to acquire. This means that it
is impossible for the teacher, the school, or the ERO to determine
whether expected acquisition outcomes of this type are actually being
achieved.

**Measuring the acquisition of new equivalence relations.** Improvements
in this kind of learning are typically assessed by providing samples of
the stimulus items (letters, words, reading passages, number facts,
etc.) for the learner to respond to and by coding the learner\'s
responses as correct or incorrect. Increases in the ratio of corrects to
errors from day to day provide a measure of rate of learning on this
kind of acquisition outcome.
