---
grand_parent: 'Learning processes, learning outcomes and phases of learning '
great_grand_parent: 'Important learning and teaching events '
great_great_grand_parent: 'Teacher Education''s Core Knowledge and Skills.'
has_children: false
layout: default
nav_order: 1
parent: 'Basic types of acquisition outcomes '
title: 'The acquisition of new meanings '
---
# The acquisition of new meanings


```yaml
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
```


Much learning, especially during the early years, involves learning what
particular symbols mean. Young English speaking children have to learn
the meaning of the word *dog*, young French speaking children must learn
the meaning of the word *chien*, and young German speaking children must
learn what the word *Hund* means. Initially it is the meaning of the
spoken words which must be acquired. Later the child will need to learn
the meaning of the written words. At the same time, the child will also
need to learn the meanings of symbols such as the numbers *0* to *9*,
gestures such as an outstretched hand, facial expressions such as a
glare, signs such as the "female toilet" sign, markings such as a zebra
crossing, and so on.

This kind of learning is referred to in a variety of ways -- as "the
development of understanding", as "the construction of meaning", as "the
development of comprehension" and so on. Because there is no agreed
terminology, there is also much confusion about the nature of the
learning outcome and how progress towards this type of learning outcome
should be measured. During the 1990s much was written about the
"construction of meaning". One of the connotations of this phrase is the
implication that learners actively or consciously "construct" new
meanings whereas, in fact, the research suggests that, given the right
kind of experience, new meanings are acquired almost automatically and
without conscious effort on the part of the learner (e.g. Staats, Staats
& Crawford, 1962).

In this account we will use the term *comprehension* to refer to those
cases where the learner understands or comprehends the meaning of a
particular word, symbol or sign.

**The measurement of comprehension.** There are several well established
ways of assessing comprehension. Comprehension in young children may be
tested by presenting the oral or written word and asking the child to
chose, from an array or four or five pictures (or objects), the picture
(or object) which best represents the meaning of the word. Once a child
can read, the array of four or five pictures can be replaced with four
or five definitions, of which only one represents the meaning of the
target word. Older children may simply be asked to define the word or to
"tell me what this word means". Because the human brain establishes the
link between a symbol and its meaning extremely quickly and without
conscious effort, it will not normally be possible to track an evolving
or developing understanding of the meaning of a symbol but only to
establish whether the child understands the meaning or not.


#### References

-   Staats, A. W., Staats, C. K. & Crawford, H. L. (1962). First-order
    conditioning of meaning and the parallel conditioning of a GSR.
    Journal of General Psychology, 97, 159-167.
