---
has_children: true
layout: default
nav_order: 1
title: 'How conceptual responses are acquired '
---
# How conceptual responses are acquired 


::: documentByline
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
:::

::: {#parent-fieldname-text-78c3ada4e32f44a1a32ec29099f5bdda}
Much school learning involves the acquisition of new concepts,
generalisations and general principles. Common examples include learning
to identify, name and use new concepts and learning when to use and when
not to use new procedures, operations, and rules.

In a small proportion of cases, a new concept may be acquired by
learning the concept definition. For example, "a triangle is a
three-sided figure". In the majority of cases however, a well developed
understanding of a new generalisation such as a new concept arises only
as a result of a fairly lengthy history of contact with both examples
and non examples of the concept. The contact with these examples and
non-examples of a new concept may be specifically programmed by the
teacher or they may occur quite adventitiously as a result of exposure
to television programmes, books, study activities of various kinds,
project work, or discussion with others.

In the case where we want to ensure that the learner develops a degree
of understanding sufficient to use the new concept, the question becomes
"How can we design a teaching communication or programme that teaches
with some examples, so that the student can then respond to any example
for the case taught?" (Carnine & Becker, 1982, p. 249). This question
may be pictured as follows.

![Figure 4420a. The universe of positive and negative example of a new
concept which must be sampled in order to acquire a working
understanding of that
concept](../../../../../assets/images/Figure4420a.png "Figure 4420a. The universe of positive and negative example of a new concept which must be sampled in order to acquire a working understanding of that concept"){.image-inline}

*Figure 4420a. The universe of positive and negative example of a new
concept which must be sampled in order to acquire a working
understanding of that concept*

In order to acquire an understanding of, say, the concept of a noun the
learner must experience sufficient positive examples and sufficient
negative examples of nouns within the context of learning activities in
which correct and incorrect classification responses produce
differential feedback. The number of examples and non-examples must be
sufficient to teach the learner to respond correctly to the critical
samenesses which define membership in the stimulus class "nouns".

If the number or the range of positive examples experienced by the
learner is insufficient, undergeneralised responding may result. An
undergeneralisation is indicated when the learner fails to recognise
examples of the stimulus class as positive examples. If the learner
recognised some nouns as nouns but not others, this would be an example
of undergeneralisation. The following diagram illustrates the
characteristics of undergeneralised responding.

![Figure 4420b. Response characteristics of a learner who has only an
undergeneralised understanding of a new
concept](../../../../../assets/images/Figure4420b.png "Figure 4420b. Response characteristics of a learner who has only an undergeneralised understanding of a new concept"){.image-inline}

*Figure 4420b. Response characteristics of a learner who has only an
undergeneralised understanding of a new concept*

If the number or the range of negative examples experienced by the
learner is insufficient, overgeneralised responding may result. An
overgeneralisation is indicated when the learner responds to certain
non-examples as if they were examples of the stimulus class. If the
learner identified not only nouns but also certain other kinds of words
as nouns, this would be an example of an overgeneralisation. The
following diagram illustrates the characteristics of overgeneralised
responding.

![Figure 4420c. Response characteristics of a learner who has an
overgeneralised understanding of a new
concept](../../../../../assets/images/Figure4420c.png "Figure 4420c. Response characteristics of a learner who has an overgeneralised understanding of a new concept"){.image-inline}

*Figure 4420c. Response characteristics of a learner who has an
overgeneralised understanding of a new concept*

Most concept learning during the school years is cumulative. Particular
concepts are introduced at one point in the curriculum (usually as
knowledge responses) and then revisited and refined on a number of
occasions at later points in the curriculum. It is often quite
appropriate to teach a limited generalisation during, say, the early
primary school years, to extend that generalisation during, say, the
later primary school years, and perhaps not to require completely
accurate performance until the secondary school years. For example, the
stimulus class "addition word problems" tends to be defined during the
early school years as problems *without* irrelevant numerical
information. In the later school years, however, we would normally want
to define "addition word problems" more broadly to include addition
problems which *do* contain irrelevant numerical information.

The emergence of a working understanding of a new concept is signalled
when the learner is able to identify never-before-seen examples as
examples of the concept. Carnine (1990) argues that the learning of new
concepts and generalisations is greatly simplified by virtue of the fact
that human beings have an in-built ability to detect and to respond to
samenesses in the world around them. This means that generalised correct
responding can often be acquired as a result of contact with a
relatively small number of positive and negative examples -- especially
if the features which define membership in the stimulus class are
relatively easy for the learner to recognise. However it is also clear
from text book analyses that the great majority of textbooks do not
provide anything like the number of examples and non-examples which are
actually required in order to develop an accurate understanding of the
new concepts which these texts have been designed to teach. "Students
need instruction not only on how to perform an operation correctly (such
as finding the least common denominator) but also on discriminating when
a particular operation is appropriate. This kind of discrimination
practice is lacking in most mathematics curricula" (Kelly, Gersten &
Carnine, 1990, p. 23).

The teaching of generalised correct responding is typically postponed
until the learner can perform the response, skill or procedure which is
to be generalised. For example, the teacher normally waits until the
child can say the number words (say "six", "seven", "eight", and so on)
before beginning to teach understanding of the *concepts* of "six",
"seven", "eight" and so on. Likewise, teachers usually teach children
*how* to add using simple numerical examples before they try to teach
children how to recognise the different kinds of word problems which can
be solved by adding.

This is good practice. If the student can already perform the correct
response to at least one or two examples from the stimulus class, then
the task of teaching him or her to generalise this response to the
entire stimulus class is much simplified. If the learner can already
perform the response with a certain degree of fluency, they can give
their full attention to learning to discriminate between the target
stimulus class and other stimulus classes.

It further follows that, if the teacher wishes to teach generalised
correct responding to a student who has not yet learned how to perform
the required response (or procedure), then this response (or procedure)
should be pre-taught. That is, the learner should be taught how to
perform the response before being taught the generalisations required
for the development of generalised correct responding.

In order to acquire an accurate understanding of a new concept or
generalisation, five essential conditions must be present. Correct
responses must be prompted initially, the learner must be provided with
multiple opportunities to respond to both examples from the stimulus
class and non-examples, correct responses to examples and non-examples
must be differentially reinforced, and sufficient practice must be
provided to ensure that the new understanding is maintained (retained).
.
:::

::: referencesList
#### References

-   Carnine, D. W. (1990). New research on the brain: Implications for
    instruction. Phi Delta Kappan, 72, 372-377.
-   Carnine, D. W., & Becker, W. C. (1982). Theory of instruction:
    Generalization issues. Educational Psychology, 2, 249-262.
-   Kelly, B., Gersten, R., & Carnine, D. (1990). Student error patterns
    as a function of curriculum design: Teaching fractions to remedial
    high school students and high school students with learning
    disabilities. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 23(1), 23-29.
:::
