---
has_children: false
layout: default
nav_order: 1
title: 'Conditions which may affect the development of new likes and dislikes '
---
# Conditions which may affect the development of new likes and dislikes 


::: documentByline
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
:::

::: {#parent-fieldname-text-70546a505e8c428ea11573baec757b09}
There are many conditions which operate in the classroom to affect the
ratio of reinforcement to punishment experienced by individual students.
This is because there are many sources of reinforcement and punishment
in these settings.

It is a fact of classroom life that it is only possible to reduce
aversive consequences to a certain level in the classroom. It is never
possible to eliminate these entirely. There will always be some
misbehaviour which has to be attended to by the teacher. Students will
always make some errors which need to be corrected. Even with the best
teaching methods there will always be some learning tasks which are, by
their very nature, not all that interesting.

This means that in order to maintain an appropriate ratio of
reinforcement to punishment it is not sufficient simply to reduce the
frequency of occurrence of aversive consequences following misbehaviour,
errors, and mistakes. It is also necessary to increase the frequency of
occurrence of reinforcement for corrects, improvements and effort.

Most of the research into teacher reactions and student liking has been
descriptive research. Experimental studies which demonstrate a cause and
effect relationship between the ratio of positively reinforcing
consequences to punishing consequences in the classroom and the
development of student liking are almost non-existent. Clearly this is a
major shortcoming in the research into learning and teaching in the
classroom. In one of the few exceptions to this observation, Alschuler
(1968, cited by Gage and Berliner, 1988, p. 372-373), designed a maths
programme in which students took part in a "game" in which they
contracted to get a certain percentage of maths problems correct. The
higher the standard aimed for, the greater the rewards. Students also
lost points for incorrect answers, for not reaching their goals, for
revising their contracts and for late work. End of year prizes were
given to the students with the highest points totals.

Children who did nothing in mathematics in fourth grade, except under
duress, suddenly began taking their books home on weekends. Very few
deadlines were missed. Many students began assessing themselves more
optimistically, yet realistically, and they performed up to those
standards. One boy fidgeted through the entire year in mathematics in
fourth grade. Threats and stern words could not focus his attention, nor
could they keep him in his seat. His total output reflected a small
percentage of his ability. With the new structure, however, he chose his
first goal of 70 per cent with two weeks to finish his contract. Within
three days he revised his goal upward to 100 per cent, paid the extra
fee, and did all the problems with only 11 errors out of almost 400
problems. \... it was the teacher\'s impression that in the first half
of fifth grade, enthusiasm was generated more by the game than by
intrinsic interest in mathematics. However, by the second half of the
year, buoyed by new found competence, the game, prizes and play money
became more or less irrelevant while the pace of work continued.
Mathematics itself had become more interesting (Gage & Berliner, 1988).

While there is almost no scientific research into the relative
effectiveness of different ways of building and maintaining a liking for
specific classroom tasks and activities, it is easy to visualise the
kinds of variables which would need to be analysed in any such programme
of research.

**Level of task variety**

One of the major sources of biological reinforcement is a moderate level
of sensory stimulation. Sensory stimulation is a function of change in
the environment. When a child says "I'm bored" they are usually saying
"I want to do something different." There are many ways in which
teachers can maintain adequate levels of variety, and hence sensory
stimulation, in the classroom. It is possible to make regular changes to
lesson content. Shorter lessons on each topic generate more variety than
longer lessons. It is possible to make regular changes to the type of
learning activity in which students are engaged. Moving backwards and
forwards between observation, prompted practice, independent practice,
and fluency building activities generates more variety than
concentrating on one type of outcome for long periods of time. It is
possible to make regular changes to the mode or method of instruction,
shifting backwards and forwards between whole class activities, small
group activities, peer practice, and individual work. It is possible to
make regular changes with respect to the learning tasks which are being
used to achieve particular teaching goals. For example, new knowledge
topics can be introduced in different ways, using video, class
discussion, individual and group research activities, and so on.
Practice can be provided in a variety of ways, using different kinds of
worksheets, games, peer practice, computer assisted instruction,
homework activities, and so on.

Given the importance of developing in students a liking for learning, it
is surprising to discover that almost no research has been undertaken
into the effects on student interest of these various ways of
maintaining adequate levels of sensory stimulation in the classroom.

There are other ways of introducing variety into classroom activities as
well. Gage & Berliner (1988, p. 384) suggest that teachers make use of
simulations and games. "Games are fun, provide important learning
experiences, keep students highly involved, and involve the teacher in
the learning experience in new and enjoyable ways. . . . There are two
questions you should ask to help you decide whether a learning game is
effective . . . (a) Does the game increase and sustain attention? (b) Is
the student keenly involved in the game?" (Gage & Berliner, 1988, p.
384).

Since the degree of variety which is necessary to sustain interest
cannot always be predicted with accuracy, the general rule for variety
is to continuously monitor student interest. If student interest and
attention is flagging, then this should be taken as an unambiguous sign
that it is time to change activities. From time to time this will mean
abandoning an activity which has not gone according to plan even before
it has been completed. Better an incomplete activity than an activity
which is conditioning a negative attitude.

Some classroom tasks are experienced as tedious by the great majority of
students. Included under this heading are writing tasks, spelling tasks,
and some fluency building tasks. "One difficulty with teaching spelling
skills is that the tedious task of ordering letters to produce words
engenders a negative affect in students" (Brown, 1990, p. 370). Clearly,
it is even more important to provide an adequate variety of different
learning tasks in areas which are by their nature rather tedious than it
is in content areas which are more interesting.

**Task relevance**

It is widely argued that students find learning tasks which they
perceive as relevant to their daily lives as more reinforcing than
learning tasks which are not perceived as relevant and that students are
more likely to develop a positive attitude towards a particular subject
or topic if instruction is framed in such a way that the relevance of
the topic is made apparent (Gage & Berliner, 1988). Given that this
belief is widespread, it comes as a surprise to discover than there
appears to be no controlled research on the effects of degree of
personal relevance on the development of student liking for a given
topic.

**Task length and response effort**

The practice activities which are required of the learner can vary from
those which involve a number of relatively short responses (such reading
words, practising spelling, or answering maths questions) to those which
involve relatively long responses such as writing a story or writing a
report. When given a choice, learners usually express a liking for or a
preference for practice activities which require less time and effort to
complete (Cates & Skinner, 2000; Logan & Skinner, 1998; Wildmon,
Skinner, McCurdy & Sims, 1999). This preference has also been
demonstrated in a series of half a dozen controlled experiments
involving university students (Cates, 2005). The effect is so consistent
that students will choose a homework assignment which consists of a
mixture of shorter and longer problems over a assignment which contains
only longer problems even when the mixed assignment contains a larger
number of problems to complete (Wildmon et al., 1999).

The results of these experiments are consistent with the view that a
liking for depends upon the ratio of reinforcement to non-reinforcement
in practice tasks. Practice tasks which consist of a mixture of shorter
and longer practice responses and which produce a greater density of
reinforcement (in the form of items completed and items correct) produce
a greater level of liking for (and are selected in preference to)
practice tasks which involve longer responses or responses which greater
effort.

There are a number of ways in which teachers can manage the level of
response effort which is required to complete practice activities so
that students' liking for those activities is maintained. The teacher
can construct practice activities which require a mixture of short
responses and longer responses, or which require a mixture of easier and
more difficult items, or a mixture of previously practised and
relatively new responses, or a mixture of oral responses and written
responses (Skinner, Wallace & Neddenriep, 2002). These interspersal
practice activities allow the teacher to manage the difficulty level of
classroom activities while at the same time ensuring that students are
continually learning and practising new and more complex skills.

**Ratio of success to failure on particular learning tasks**

A major source of reinforcement in the classroom is success (or more
correctly the feedback which tells us that we have been successful) and
this is recognised by most teachers and parents. What is less well
understood is that error feedback is experienced by the great majority
of children as aversive. That this is so is shown by the fact that most
children try hard to respond correctly and to avoid errors and, if
unsure what to do, will often do nothing rather than risk making a
mistake. In technical terms, feedback which tells the learner that she
or he has responded incorrectly is one of the most common forms of
classroom punishment (using the word punishment in its technical sense).
Feedback which tells us that we have done right, done well, or done
better than before acquires reinforcing properties (and hence the power
to elicit good feelings) at quite an early age.

Classroom tasks may vary from very easy through moderately difficult to
very difficult. Easy tasks are ones in which almost all learner
responses are correct. Moderately difficult tasks are those in which 80
to 90 per cent of learner responses are correct. Difficult tasks are
those in which less than two thirds of student responses are correct.

Practical experience suggests that the classroom tasks which provide the
most reinforcement are those tasks which constitute a "reasonable
challenge" to the learner. A reasonably challenging task is one which
the student can complete with a little effort (and/or a little help) but
which he or she cannot complete without that effort. Margaret Clifford
(1990) makes the point that, when given the choice, younger learners
show a distinct preference for tasks which are just a little bit above
their current level of ability. If the majority of classroom tasks are
too simple or too easy, the learner quickly becomes bored and a dislike
for classroom tasks may develop. Note that "too simple" includes tasks
which have been designed for younger learners. "We attribute the success
we experience on easy tasks to task ease; we attribute the success we
experience on extremely difficult tasks to luck. Neither type of success
does much to enhance self-image. It is only success at moderately
difficult or truly challenging tasks that we explain in terms of
personal effort .. and these explanations give rise to feelings of
pride, competence, determination, satisfaction, persistence and personal
control" (Clifford, 1990, p. 22).

Tasks which are too difficult for the learner to complete (or to
complete to the expected standard) also generate little or no
reinforcement for the learner. Worse still, they may generate feelings
of frustration and misbehaviour (Center, Deitz & Kaufman, 1982). If the
student experiences too many tasks which are too difficult, a dislike
for these tasks may develop.

This suggests that a liking for, say, maths is more likely to develop in
students whose experience consists largely of learning tasks of moderate
difficulty, that is learning tasks which provide a reasonable challenge.
Very difficult learning tasks should be used only occasionally so that
any feelings of frustration which they generate do not become
conditioned to mathematics tasks in general. Likewise, very simple
learning tasks should be used only occasionally so that any feelings of
boredom which they generate do not become conditioned to mathematics
activities.

This analysis further suggests that the practice tasks engaged in by
individual learners should be adjusted until they are resulting in at
least four times as many correct responses as incorrect responses. This
can be accomplished by monitoring the accuracy rates of individual
students on practice tasks and by adjusting the interspersal ratio (the
ratio of previously acquired and yet-to-be-acquired responses) so that
the 80% success rate is maintained over time. Student preference (i.e.
liking for) practice activities which include easy items as well as
difficult items has been demonstrated with a variety of different kinds
of learning activities.

In the classroom setting, a learning task which is the right level of
difficulty for one student will be too easy for some and too difficult
for others. Practical ways of solving this problem represent a major
challenge to teachers and to teaching researchers.

**Ratio of positive to negative social reactions**

Another major source of reinforcement and punishment in the classroom is
social - the reactions of teachers and other students to appropriate and
inappropriate classroom behaviour, to improvements, and to correct and
incorrect responses on learning tasks. Experience suggests that teachers
who are consistently positive and enthusiastic (in a genuine way) tend
to be liked by students while teachers who are consistently negative and
"crabby" tend to be disliked by students. Furthermore, a negative
attitude towards the teacher may generalise from the teacher to the
classroom situation in general.

A number of observational studies (Beaman & Wheldall, 2000) have found
that teachers tend to comment in a disapproving way as often as they
comment in an approving way. White (1975) observed a sample of 100 U.S.
teachers. The Grade 1 teachers reacted positively to student behaviour
at a rate of .66 approvals per minute and reacted negatively at almost
the same rate on average (a rate of .63 disapprovals per minute). The
mean approval and disapproval rates for the Grade 3 teachers were .38
and .47 per minute and the rates for the Grade 4 teachers were .32 and
.64. Wyatt and Hawkins (1987) observed 35 U.S. teachers. The Grade 1
teachers used positive reactions at a rate of .58 per minute and
negative reactions at a rate of .52 per minute. Rossiter (1982) observed
a sample of 11 N.Z. junior school teachers and found approval and
disapproval rates of .62 and .73 per minute, respectively. In the
Rossiter study, individual teachers varied from one teacher who approved
only 15% of the behaviours to which she reacted to one teacher whose
reactions were 90% positive.

Not only do teachers have difficulty in being positive, they also have
difficulty in reacting positively to all students. Several studies
(e.g., Parker, Larsen & Roberts, 1981; Raber & Weisz, 1981) have shown
that teachers tend to direct fewer positive comments to low achieving
children than to high achieving children. Allington (1980) found that
teachers tended to interrupt low progress readers more often, to provide
these learners with fewer opportunities to self-correct, and to correct
these students more often. Other studies have observed teachers praising
children with intellectual disabilities *more* often than their
non-handicapped peers (e.g., Brady & Taylor, 1989; Rietveld, 1986,
1989).

In a teacher training study, Dennis Rose found that some teacher
trainees were able to achieve approval to disapproval ratios of 3:1 with
almost no training, some were able to achieve 3:1 ratios after about
eight sessions of supervised practice and some were unable to achieve a
3:1 ratio even with extensive supervised practice (Rose, 1994). This
research suggests that it is not sufficient simply to advise teachers
that they should focus upon and comment upon the behaviour that they
want rather than the behaviour which they do not want. The research
suggests that the goal of responding in a primarily positive fashion to
the behaviour to students in the classroom is a goal which many teachers
find difficult to achieve (Rose, 1994; Rossiter, 1982).
:::

::: referencesList
#### References

-   Allington, R. L. (1980). Teacher interruption behavior during
    primary-grade oral reading. Journal of Educational Psychology, 72,
    371-377.
-   Beaman, R., & Wheldall, K. (2000). Teachers\' use of approval and
    disapproval in the classroom, Educational Psychology, 20, 431-446.
-   Brady, M. P., & Taylor, R. D. (1989). Instructional consequences in
    mainstreamed middle school classes: Reinforcement and corrections.
    Remedial and Special Education, 10(2), 31-36.
-   Brown, A. S. (1990). A review of recent research on spelling.
    Educational Psychology Review, 2, 365-397.
-   Cates, G. L. (2005). A review of the effects of interspersing
    procedures on the stages of academic skill development. Journal of
    Behavioral Education, 14, 305-325.
-   Cates, G. L., & Skinner, C. H. (2000). Getting remedial mathematics
    students to prefer homework with 20% and 40% more problems: An
    investigation of the strength of the interspersing procedure.
    Psychology in the Schools, 37, 339-347.
-   Center, D. B., Deitz, S. M., & Kaufman, M. E. (1982). Student
    ability, task difficulty, and inappropriate classroom behavior: A
    study of children with behavior disorders. Behavior Modification, 6,
    355-374.
-   Clifford, M. M. (1990). Students need challenge, not easy success.
    Educational Leadership, 48(1), 22-26.
-   Gage, N. L., & Berliner, D. C. (1988). Educational psychology (4th
    ed.). Boston: Houghton Mifflin Co.
-   Logan, P., & Skinner, C. H. (1998). Improving students' perceptions
    of mathematics assignment by increasing problem completion rates: Is
    problem completion a reinforcing event? School Psychology Quarterly,
    13, 322-331.
-   Parker, R., Larsen, S., & Roberts, T. (1981). Teacher-child
    interactions of first-grade students who have learning problems. The
    Elementary School Journal, 81, 163-171.
-   Raber, S. M., & Weisz, J. R. (1981). Teacher feedback to mentally
    retarded and non-retarded children. American Journal of Mental
    Deficiency, 86, 148-156.
-   Rietveld, C. M. (1986). The adjustment to school of eight children
    with Down\'s Syndrome from an early intervention programme.
    Australia and New Zealand Journal of Developmental Disabilities, 12,
    159-175.
-   Rietveld, C. M. (1989). An evaluation of 7- to 12-year old children
    with Down\'s Syndrome in home and school settings: A follow-up study
    of children from the Christchurch Early Intervention Programme.
    Research Report No. 89-1. Christchurch, N.Z.: University of
    Canterbury, Education Department.
-   Rose, D.J. (1994). The effect of practice on the acquisition and
    maintenance of teaching skills. Unpublished PhD thesis.
    Christchurch, N.Z.: University of Canterbury, Education Department.
-   Rossiter, A. (1982). The difficult to teach junior school pupil:
    Identification and teaching strategies. Research Report No 82-1.
    University of Canterbury, Education Department.
-   Skinner, C. H., Wallace, M. A., & Neddenriep, C. E., (2002).
    Academic remediation: Educational applications of research on
    assignment preference and choice. Child & Family Behavior therapy,
    23, 51-65.
-   White, M. A. (1975). Natural rates of teacher approval and
    disapproval in the classroom. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis,
    8, 367-372.
-   Wildmon, M. E., Skinner, C. H., McCurdy, M., & Sims, S. (1999).
    Improving secondary students' perception of the "dreaded mathematics
    word problem assignment" by giving them more word problems.
    Psychology in the Schools, 36, 319-325.
-   Wyatt, W. J., & Hawkins, R. P. (1987). Rates of teachers\' verbal
    approval and disapproval. Behavior Modification, 11, 27-51.
:::
