---
grand_parent: 'The conditions upon which learning depends '
great_great_grand_parent: 'Welcome to Teacher Education''s Core Knowledge and Skills.'
has_children: true
layout: default
nav_order: 2
parent: 'Respondent processes '
title: 'How likes and dislikes develop '
---
# How likes and dislikes develop


```yaml
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
```


It has been known for more than 80 years that likes and dislikes also
arise as a result of respondent conditioning (Keller & Schoenfeld, 1950;
Staats & Staats, 1958; Watson & Rayner, 1920). The emotional responses
which are affected by respondent conditioning include both the positive
emotional reactions (such as elation) and the negative emotional
reactions (such as anxiety) which we experience, without thinking, as we
interact with the world around us. All emotional responses are
respondents. The stimulus situations which elicit positive emotional
reactions are commonly referred to as situations which we *like* and the
stimulus situations which elicit negative emotional reactions are
commonly referred to as situations which we *dislike* (or fear or hate).

At any particular point in the life of the learner, there are some
stimulus events which elicit positive and negative emotional responses
in the learner and other stimulus events which elicit no emotional
response in the learner. Stimulus events which already elicit an
emotional response in the learner are referred to as *unconditioned
eliciting stimuli* for that emotional response. As a result of
experimental analyses of respondent conditioning we now know that
stimulus events which initially elicit no emotional reaction in the
learner can acquire the power to do so if they regularly occur in
association with stimulus events which do already elicit an emotional
reaction (Watson & Rayner, 1920). In technical terms we say that neutral
stimuli which occur in association with unconditioned eliciting stimuli
acquire the emotion-eliciting properties of the unconditioned eliciting
stimulus (Baldwin & Baldwin, 1986).

The respondent conditioning process explains how it is that likes and
dislikes develop. Stimulus events which regularly occur in association
with those events which already elicit positive emotional reactions
(good feelings) will also acquire the power to elicit positive emotional
reactions. New stimuli can acquire the power to elicit negative
emotional reactions (bad feelings) in exactly the same manner. There is
one class of events which reliably elicits good feelings and that is the
class of events known as *reinforcing events* (reinforcers). Everyone is
attracted to the events which function as reinforcers for them.
Extending the analysis, we can see that stimuli which reliably occur in
association with reinforcement will tend to become conditioned eliciting
stimuli for good feelings (that is, they will come to be liked).

There is also a class of events which reliably elicit bad feelings and
that is the class of events which we refer to as *aversive events*
(punishers). Everyone tries to avoid the events which function as
aversive events (punishers) for them. Stimulus events which reliably
occur in association with punishment tend to become conditioned
eliciting stimulus for bad feelings (such as embarrassment, anxiety, or
fear). They also become stimulus events which we come to dislike.

In short, likes and dislikes are the result of histories of positive and
negative experiences. It is this history of experiences which operates
to determine the degree of liking (or disliking) which the student has
for different types of learning tasks for different subject matter
content, for teachers, and for school in general.

The way in which school experiences shape the child's likes and dislikes
for school type activities is essential knowledge for all teachers and
teacher educators. Children arrive at school with an interest in almost
all learning activities. Some experience a series of educational
environments and experiences in which this interest is fostered and
developed with the result that the child develops a lifelong interest in
learning. Other children experience a series of educational environments
and experiences in which interest (that is, a liking for) is gradually
eroded. A loss of interest in science or maths or reading can have
disastrous consequences for the child. As children proceed through the
school system, they are expected to take an increasing amount of
responsibility for their own learning and to engage in increasing
amounts of self-directed study and self-directed practice. If the
learner loses interest in classroom activities, this self-directed
learning may not develop. As the student falls further and further
behind, they may develop an increasing dislike for school in general -
seeking only to escape from school as soon as it becomes possible to do
so. The consequences of developing a dislike for school have been
described by Margaret Clifford:

Hundreds of thousands of apathetic students abandon their schools each
year to begin lives of unemployment, poverty, crime, and psychological
distress. \... The term *dropout* may not be adequate to convey the
disastrous consequences of the abandonment of school by children and
adolescents; *educational suicide* may be a far more appropriate label.
\... We must acknowledge that educational suicide is primarily a
motivational problem - not a physical, intellectual, financial,
technological, cultural, or staffing problem. Thus we must turn to
motivational \... research as a foundation for examining this problem
and for identifying solutions (Clifford, 1990, p. 22).

It can be seen, therefore, that the ability to engender an interest in
(that is, a liking for) academic activities is an essential teaching
skill. This makes an understanding of how likes and dislikes develop an
item of essential knowledge for teachers at all levels.


#### References

-   Baldwin, J.D. & Baldwin, J.I. (1986). Behavior principles in
    everyday life (2nd ed.). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
-   Clifford, M. M. (1990). Students need challenge, not easy success.
    Educational Leadership, 48(1), 22-26.
-   Keller, F. S., & Schoenfeld, W. N. (1950). Principles of psychology.
    New York: Appleton.
-   Staats, A. W., & Staats, C. K. (1958). Attitudes established by
    classical conditioning. Journal of Abnormal Social Psychology, 61,
    211-223.
-   Watson, J. B., & Rayner, R. (1920). Conditioned emotional reactions,
    Journal of Experimental Psychology, 3, 1-14.
