---
has_children: false
layout: default
nav_order: 1
title: 'The reliability (reproducibility) of the experimental procedure '
---
# The reliability (reproducibility) of the experimental procedure 


::: documentByline
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
:::

::: {#parent-fieldname-text-7656bac6e0fe4a4ca4876e65e73ae713}
The first question which may be asked of a set of experimental
procedures is the question "Did each experimental treatment operate in a
consistent fashion from one occasion to the next?" In other words, if
these procedures were replicated (repeated) would they produce much the
same result? This question is analogous to asking whether or not a
measurement procedure has been operated in a reliable fashion.

When we talk about the reliability of an experimental procedure we are,
in essence, talking about the reproducibility of that experimental
procedure. We are asking, "If I have to replicate this experiment, will
I be able to reproduce the experimental procedures?" In order to produce
a reliable measure of treatment effects, the experimenter must devise a
way of holding the value of the independent variable constant from one
session to the next within each experimental treatment, and devise a way
of ensuring that the value of the independent variable experienced
during the administration of experimental sessions differs consistently
from the value experienced during control sessions. This facet of
experimental design is most commonly referred to as experimental
control. The reliability of a set of experimental results is closely
related to the degree of experimental control achieved during the course
of the experiment.
:::
