---
grand_parent: 'Types of curriculum goals '
great_grand_parent: 'Important learning and teaching events '
great_great_grand_parent: 'Welcome to Teacher Education''s Core Knowledge and Skills.'
has_children: false
layout: default
nav_order: 3
parent: 'What is curriculum? '
title: 'The eight essential learning areas '
---
# The eight essential learning areas


```yaml
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
```


In the latest revision of the New Zealand curriculum (Ministry of
Education, 2007) the eight essential learning areas are defined as
follows.

**English**

The English curriculum is structured around two strands: making sense of
information received (listening, reading, and viewing skills) and
creating meaning for others (speaking writing and presenting skills).
Success in English is seen as fundamental to success across the rest of
the curriculum.

**Mathematics**

The New Zealand mathematics curriculum is structured in three strands:
number and algebra, geometry and measurement, and statistics. It aims to
help children to learn how to structure and to organise, to carry out
procedures flexibly and accurately, to process and communicate
information, and to enjoy intellectual challenge.

**Science**

The science curriculum is organised into five strands: (a) the nature of
science and how scientists work, (b) the living world and ecology, (c)
the planet earth and beyond, (d) the physical world (physics) and (e)
the material world (chemistry). The aims of the science curriculum are
to develop an understanding of current scientific theories, how to use
scientific knowledge to solve problems, and how to use scientific
knowledge and skills to make informed decisions about their own lives
and sustainability of the environment.

**Technology**

The technology curriculum in organised into three strands: (a)
technological practice where students study concepts, plans,
technological models, products and systems, (b) technological knowledge
where they study how and why things work, and (c) the nature of
technology where they develop an understanding of technology as a
discipline, its impacts on society and the environment and the issues
raised by these impacts.

**Social Sciences**

The social sciences curriculum in organised in four strands: (a)
identity, culture and social organisation, (b) place and environment and
the relationships between people and the environment, (c) continuity and
change including past events and experiences and the ways in which these
have been interpreted over time, and (d) the economic world where
students learn about the production, distribution and consumption of
goods and services.

**The arts**

The arts curriculum involves students learning to work both
independently and collaboratively to construct meanings, produce works,
and respond to and value the contributions of others while at the same
time learning to use their imagination to engage with unexpected
outcomes and to explore multiple solutions. The arts curriculum includes
four disciplines; dance, drama, music (and sound arts), and the visual
arts .

**Health and physical education**

The health and physical education curriculum focuses on the well-being
of students themselves, of other people, and of society. The area is
structured in four strands: personal health and physical development,
movement concepts and motor skills, relationships with other people, and
healthy communities and environments. Seven areas of study are to be
included in each strand: mental health, sexuality education, food and
nutrition, body care and physical safety, physical activity, sport
studies and outdoor education.

**Learning languages**

The eighth curriculum area provides the opportunity to learn a language
other than the language of instruction. Learning to use the language
(communication) is central but this curriculum area also includes
knowledge about the language and cultural knowledge.


#### References

-   Ministry of Education. (2007). The New Zealand curriculum.
    Wellington, NZ: New Zealand Ministry of Education.
