---
grand_parent: 'How is learning to be observed and recorded? '
great_grand_parent: 'Types of research evidence '
great_great_grand_parent: 'Welcome to Teacher Education''s Core Knowledge and Skills.'
has_children: false
layout: default
nav_order: 2
parent: 'What, exactly, is observed by the three main approaches to research? '
title: 'Do cognitive scientists study events which can be observed in practice? '
---
# Do cognitive scientists study events which can be observed in practice? 


::: documentByline
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
:::

::: {#parent-fieldname-text-95a83deafbb64f89aacb51822ec718b9}
Most cognitive scientists presume that the behaviour of others exists
independently of our perception of it (the realist presumption) and that
the changes which we refer to as learning can be objectively observed
and recorded. "Scientists emphasise objectivity - that is, they attempt
to define and deal with the matters they investigate in ways that can,
at least in principle, be agreed on by everyone" (Vasta, Haith & Miller,
1992, p. 61). "Subjective belief . . . must be checked against objective
reality. The scientist must always subject his notions to the court of
empirical inquiry and test" (Kerlinger, 1964, p. 134).

Further evidence that this is the case is provided by the fact that most
social science methods texts emphasise the importance of employing only
those instruments which provide an accurate measure of the construct
which is of interest. "The precise measurement of behaviors and their
causes is of utmost importance because scientific research determines
causality by focusing on change. . . . Unless these factors and
behaviors have been measured very accurately, it may be difficult to
determine whether any changes have, in fact, taken place" (Vasta et al.,
1992, p. 61).

While recognising that the researcher\'s theoretical position, values,
and opinions may distort or bias the questions selected for study and
the way in which they are studied, cognitive scientists in general tend
to assume that the behaviour of others can nevertheless be observed and
recorded with reasonable accuracy. "Quantitative researchers attempt to
keep themselves from influencing the collection of data. Instruments
with established psychometric properties, such as achievement tests and
standardized observation schedules are used to collect data" (Borg &
Gall, 1989, p. 23).

The question of whether or not observers can reach agreement on what
they have seen is not simply an assumption which social scientists make.
It is a question which they have studied. Rosenthal (1978), for example,
found a very high level of agreement between observers and checkers in a
sample of 21 studies involving some 140,000 observations.

Most cognitive scientists tend to be critical realists rather than naive
realists. Cook and Campbell, the authors of an influential book on
experimentation, state their position as follows:

Such a . . . perspective . . . enables us to recognize causal
perceptions as "subjective" or "constructed by the mind"; but at the
same time it stresses that many causal perceptions constitute assertions
about the nature of the world which go beyond the immediate experience
of perceivers and so have objective contents which can be right or wrong
(albeit not always testable). This perspective is realist because it
assumes that causal relationships exist outside of the human mind, and
it is critical-realist because it assumes that these valid causal
relationships cannot be perceived with total accuracy by our imperfect
sensory and intellective capacities (Cook & Campbell, 1979, p. 29).

In spite of the cognitive scientist's strong empirical stance, the great
majority of the constructs created by cognitive scientists are
hypothetical constructs, that is, mechanisms or processes whose
existence is inferred from observable behaviours rather than being
directly observable. Examples include constructs such as intelligence,
locus of control, the various types of memory, metacognitive awareness,
the various types of motivation, self-efficacy, self-esteem, and so on.
The presumed mental structures and mental processes of the cognitive
scientist provide very clear examples of constructs which refer to
entities which are in principle unobservable. Examples include the short
term store, the long term store, a rich network of connections,
distributed processing, and so on.

The great majority of cognitive scientists believe that these
hypothetical constructs refer to events which, while they can only be
inferred from observable behaviours, do, in fact, exist. "Such traits as
intelligence, learning, hostility, anxiety, or motivation are not
directly observable and are generally referred to as "constructs,"
implying that they are constructions of the scientist\'s imagination.
Constructs cannot be seen, heard, or felt. They can only be inferred by
phenomena such as test scores or by observed hostile or aggressive acts,
skin responses, pulse rates, or persistence at a task" (Best & Kahn,
1993, p. 8).

Cognitive scientists justify the use of hypothetical constructs by
arguing that "hypothetical constructs are used in all sciences . . . We
postulate mechanical aptitude to account for differences in performance
on certain tests . . . Hypothetical constructs are really products of
the scientist\'s imagination. They are imaginary concepts which produce
a structure around which he can order his thinking" (Mouly, 1970, p.
60).

Cognitive scientists claim that the methods which they have developed
are methods which enable objective study of the behaviours, mental
processes, feelings, and the other constructs which comprise the subject
matter of social and cognitive science. Most social science methods
texts contain lengthy chapters describing the procedures which must be
followed in order to obtain accurate (that is, objective) measures of
social science constructs.

At the same time, social scientists continually defend the use of
constructs which are mentalisms, that is, entities and processes which
cannot be observed. These two positions are clearly contradictory. How
does one establish the structure, function, or even existence, of
something which can never be observed? The use by avowed empiricists of
constructs which refer to events which can only be inferred but not
observed is one of the great contradictions of cognitive science. The
use of non-physical constructs is unique to cognitive science. No other
science routinely employs such constructs. The use of non-physical
constructs leaves the researcher free to generate whatever constructs he
or she desires and to attribute to these whatever properties he or she
desires. The use of constructs which cannot be observed leaves the
cognitive scientist open to the charge that cognitive science is not a
science at all.
:::

::: referencesList
#### References

-   Best, J. W., & Kahn, J. V. (1993). Research in education (7th ed.).
    Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
-   Borg, W. R. & Gall, M. D. (1989). Educational research: An
    introduction (5th ed.). New York: Longman.
-   Cook, T. D., & Campbell, D. T. (1979). Quasi-experimentation: Design
    & analysis issues for field settings. Chicago: Rand McNally
    Publishing Co.
-   Kerlinger, F. N. (1964). Foundations of behavioral research:
    Educational and psychological inquiry. New York: Holt, Rinehart and
    Winston Inc.
-   Mouly, G. J. (1970). The science of educational research (2nd ed.).
    New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold Company.
-   Rosenthal, R. (1978). How often are our numbers wrong? American
    Psychologist, 33, 1005-1008.
-   Vasta, R., Haith, M. M., & Miller, S. A. (1992). Child psychology:
    The modern science. New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
:::
