---
has_children: true
layout: default
nav_order: 0
title: 'How new equivalence relations are acquired '
---
# How new equivalence relations are acquired 


::: documentByline
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
:::

::: {#parent-fieldname-text-01613f47e0de43b087fa37439d588559}
Much human learning involves learning how to respond correctly to
letters, words, numbers, mathematical symbols, mathematical expressions,
chemical symbols, and so on. In this account we are referring to this
kind of learning outcome as the acquisition of *equivalence relations*.
We use the term *equivalence relations* because the stimulus element and
response element are equivalent. Equivalence relations include the
ability to respond correctly to actual objects (as when learning a
proper name), to written symbols (as in reading) and to spoken language
(as in spelling). The response elements of an equivalence relationship
may be an oral response, a written response, or an indication of
comprehension (e.g. pointing to the named object). It is also possible
to have an equivalence relationship between a stimulus and a motor
response -- as in the case of learning to type and the case of learning
to read and play music on a musical instrument.

Research into the learning of equivalence relations has revealed a
number of interesting features of this kind of learning.

One characteristic of this kind of learning is that, once a correct
response has been learned, the stimulus and response elements are
usually found to be reversible, that is, interchangeable. Current
thinking (e.g. Sidman, 1994) is that reversibility is a basic
characteristic of human learning (in the same way that reinforcement is
a basic characteristic of human learning). However, whether or not this
proves to be true, reversibility is clearly an extremely important
feature of human learning for it greatly simplifies both the learning
and the teaching of oral and written language skills.

Secondly, language learning does not involve single, reversible,
equivalence relations. It involves *sets* of equivalence relations.
Consider the child who is learning to use the word "book".

![Figure 4410. Diagram of the six equivalence relations which are
involved in learning to use, read, understand, and spell a
word](../../../../../assets/images/Figure4410.png "Figure 4410. Diagram of the six equivalence relations which are involved in learning to use, read, understand, and spell a word"){.image-inline}

*Figure 4410. Diagram of the six equivalence relations which are
involved in learning to use, read, understand, and spell a word*

As can be seen from the table there are three basic pairs of equivalence
relations: #1 & #2 comprehending the orally spoken word (and vice
versa), #3 & #4 reading the written word (and vice versa) and #5 & #6
comprehending the written word (and vice versa).

There have been a number of well controlled experimental analyses of the
learning of sets of equivalence relations such as these. (For a summary
of this research, see Sidman, 1994.) This research has discovered
something very interesting about the way in which these relations are
learned. If any two of these pairs of correspondences are taught, the
learner will be found to have acquired the third pair without any
further teaching. For example, if relation #1 (oral comprehension) and
#3 (reading) are taught, all six relations (including reading
comprehension) will be found to have been acquired.

The reason for this lies, in part, in the reversibility property. If,
the learner comprehends the spoken word (relation #1), then they will
also be able to correctly name the object which that word refers to
(relation #2). If the learner can read the word, that is, see the word
and say the word (relation #3, then they will also be able to select the
printed word, that is, hear the word and point to the matching printed
word (relation #4).

How it is that the learner also acquires the remaining two relations (in
this case relation #5 and relation #6) remains something of a mystery.
However, numerous experiments have demonstrated that if the learner can
(a) match an object with its spoken label and (b) match the spoken and
written labels, then they will also have acquired the ability to match
the object with the written label. Other experiments have shown that if
the child can (a) match an object with its spoken label and (b) match an
object with its written label, then they will also be able to match the
spoken and the written labels (Joyce, Joyce & Wellington, 1993: Joyce &
Wolking, 1989; Lynch & Cuvo, 1995; MacKay, 1985; Melchiori, de Souza &
de Rose, 2000).

The research on equivalence relations has many implications for the
design of effective teaching procedures.

Prior to entry to school, children acquire relation #1 (oral
comprehension) and relation #2 (naming responses) for a large number of
words. But they have acquired few of the relations involving the printed
versions of those words (relations #3 to #6). When the child arrives at
school, a large amount of time is spent teaching relation #3 (reading).
For each word which the child already comprehends (relation #1),
learning to read that word (relation #3) automatically results in the
emergence of the remaining two equivalence relations, that is,
object--\>printed word matching (relation #6), and reading comprehension
(relation #5). In other words, if the child already comprehends the
spoken word, once they have learned to read the word correctly, they
will also comprehend the written word.

However, the converse is also true. The child may be taught to read
words which he or she does not yet understand. But this will take a very
large amount of practice *and none of the remaining four equivalence
relations will emerge as a result*. It can be seen, therefore, that
teaching a child to read a word which they do not yet understand is a
fairly pointless activity. If a child does not yet understand an orally
spoken word, the child needs to be taught the meaning of that word
either before, or at the same time as, the child is taught to read the
word.

A child who understands a word in its spoken form and can read that
word, will also be able to match printed and spoken words (because they
will have acquired all six of the equivalence relations listed above).
Because the child can already match printed and spoken words, the task
of learning to spell the word is a relatively easy one. Given that it is
very much easier to learn to spell a word that one can already read, it
follows that there is little or no point in trying to teach a child to
spell words which they cannot yet read.

Students who are faced with the task of learning a second language by
academic study (rather than by conversational interaction) tend to find
this task particularly difficult. This is because learning a language by
academic study involves the simultaneous acquisition of *two*
equivalence relations. The child must learn both to read the foreign
words (relation #3 *and* learn the meaning of the foreign words
(relation #5) before the other four relations will emerge. This involves
at least twice as much practice as is required in either learning to
speak one\'s own language or learning to read one\'s own language.

The teaching of new equivalence relations is usually postponed until the
learner has learned how to perform the response. For example, the
teaching of reading is normally postponed until the child\'s oral
vocabulary has developed to the point where the child can already say
(pronounce) most of the words contained in the texts which will be used
for reading practice. The teaching of single digit maths operations is
normally postponed until the learner can both say and write the numbers
which go to make up the correct responses. The teaching of spelling is
normally postponed until the learner has acquired the ability to print
or write letters.

This makes good sense because, if the learner can already perform the
*response*, all the learner has to learn is *when* to perform the
response. If the learner cannot yet perform the response, two separate
skills must be acquired simultaneously (a) learning how to perform the
response and (b) learning when to perform the response.

This is why equivalence relations are learned very much more quickly
(and can be taught very much more easily) if the learner can already
perform the response. This is why teaching the correct responses to each
of a set of symbols should always begin with a check to ensure that the
learner can perform each of the *responses* which are involved. If this
check reveals that one or more of the responses cannot yet be performed
(when prompted by the teacher), then the learner should be taught how to
perform these responses before the teaching of equivalence relations
involving those responses begins.

The teaching of new equivalence relations is usually postponed until the
response has acquired some meaning for the learner. For example, the
vocabulary of early reading texts is normally restricted to words which
are likely to be meaningful words for the learner. Spelling practice,
likewise, is usually limited to words which are meaningful to the
learner. The teaching of maths "facts" is normally postponed until the
learner has a sound understanding of one and two digit number concepts.

This practice makes good sense because the learning of new
symbol--\>response relations proceeds much more quickly if the response
is one which already has some meaning for the learner. If the learner
already has a reasonable understanding of the meanings of the oral
responses "cow", "cat", and "dog", learning to read (i.e. learning to
respond correctly to) the printed words cow, cat, and dog tends to occur
much more rapidly than is the case if the child has not yet learned the
meanings of the orally spoken words.

It follows, therefore, that the teacher should precede instruction in
new equivalence relations by a test to check that each *response* is
meaningful to the learner. This is accomplished by checking to see
whether the learner uses the word correctly and in a way which
demonstrates understanding (comprehension) of the meaning of the word.
If this check identifies any of the *responses* in a set of new
equivalence relations as ones which do not have meaning for the learner,
then the meanings of those responses should be taught before instruction
in these stimulus--\>response relationships begins.

Note that there will be cases where this precondition cannot be met.
Individual letters of the alphabet do not have meaning, but children
must still learn letter--\>name and letter--\>sound relationships.
Individual notes on a manuscript page do not have much meaning, but the
student of music must still learn the note--\>name, and the
note--\>performance relationships during the early stages of music
instruction.

Assuming that the relevant responses have already been acquired and that
these responses have some meaning for the learner, then there are four
essential conditions which must be met in order for someone to learn to
respond correctly to symbols which they cannot yet respond to correctly.
The correct response must be prompted initially, the symbols must be
presented in sets so that the student learns to discriminate between
each of the new symbols, correct responses must be differentially
reinforced, and the learner must engage in sufficient practice to
remember each of the correct responses (e.g., Barbetta, Heward &
Bradley, 1993; Chiang & Schilling, 1983; Espin & Deno, 1989; Johnson,
Schuster & Bell, 1996; Keel, & Gast, 1992; Keel, Slaton, & Blackhurst,
2001; McNeish, Heron, & Okyere, 1992; Morton, Heward & Alber, 1998;
Rinaldi, Sells & McLaughlin, 1997).

These conditions may be provided within the context of a wide variety of
different kinds of practice activities. For example, the learning of
equivalence relations may take place within the context of authentic
activities, practice activities, self-study activities, peer tutoring
activities (e.g., Telecsan, Slaton & Stevens, 1999), computer presented
activities (e.g., Kinney, Stevens & Schuster, 1988), and so on.
:::

::: referencesList
#### References

-   Barbetta, P. M., Heward, W. L., & Bradley, D. M. C. (1993). Relative
    effects of whole-word and phonetic-prompt error correction on the
    acquisition and maintenance of sight words by students with
    developmental disabilities. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis,
    26, 99-110.
-   Chiang, B., & Schilling, M. E. (1983). Effectiveness of the "Speed
    Spelling Program" with five LD students. Reading Improvement, 20,
    60-63.
-   Espin, C. A., & Deno, S. L. (1989). The effects of modelling and
    prompting feedback strategies on sight word reading of students
    labelled learning disabled. Education and Treatment of Children, 12,
    219-231.
-   Johnson, P., Schuster, J., & Bell, J.K. (1996). Comparison of
    simultaneous prompting with and without error correction in teaching
    science vocabulary words to high school students with mild
    disabilities. Journal of Behavioral Education, 6, 437-458.
-   Joyce, B. G., Joyce, J. H., & Wellington, B. (1993). Using stimulus
    equivalence procedures to teach relationships between English and
    Spanish words. Education and Treatment of Children, 16, 48-65.
-   Joyce, B. G., & Wolking, W. D. (1989). Stimulus equivalence: An
    approach for teaching beginning reading skills to young children.
    Education and Treatment of Children, 12, 109-122.
-   Keel, M. C., & Gast, D. L. (1992). Small group instruction for
    students with learning disabilities: Observational and incidental
    learning. Exceptional Children, 58, 357-368.
-   Keel, M. C., Slaton, D. B., & Blackhurst, A. E. (2001). Acquisition
    of content area vocabulary for students with learning disabilities.
    Education and Treatment of Children, 24, 46-71.
-   Kinney, P. G., Stevens, K. B., & Schuster, J. W. (1988). The effects
    of CAI and time delay: A systematic program for teaching spelling.
    Journal of Special Education Technology, 9, 61-72.
-   Lynch, D. C., & Cuvo, A. J. (1995). Stimulus equivalence instruction
    of fraction-decimal relation. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis,
    28, 115-126.
-   Mackay, H. A. (1985). Stimulus equivalence in rudimentary reading
    and spelling. Analysis and Intervention in Developmental
    Disabilities, 5, 373-387.
-   McNeish, J., Heron, T. E., & Okyere, B. (1992). Effects of
    self-correction on the spelling performance of junior high school
    students with learning disabilities. Journal of Behavioral
    Education, 2, 17-27.
-   Melchiori, L. E., de Souza, D. G., & de Rose, J. C. (2000). Reading,
    equivalence, and recombination of units: A replication with students
    with different learning histories. Journal of Applied Behavior
    Analysis, 33, 97-100.
-   Morton, W. L., Heward, W. L., & Alber, S. R. (1998). When to
    self-correct: A comparison of two procedures on spelling
    performance. Journal of Behavioral Education, 8, 321-335.
-   Rinaldi, L., Sells, D., & McLaughlin, T. F. (1997). The effects of
    reading racetracks on the sight word acquisition and fluency of
    elementary students. Journal of Behavioral Education, 7, 219-233.
-   Sidman, M. (1994). Equivalence relations and behavior: A research
    story. Boston: Authors Cooperative.
-   Telecsan, B. L., Slaton, D. B., & Stevens, K. B. (1999). Peer
    tutoring: Teaching students with learning disabilities to deliver
    time delay instruction. Journal of Behavioral Education, 9, 133-154.
:::
