---
has_children: false
layout: default
nav_order: 1
title: 'The units of analysis employed by cognitive scientists '
---
# The units of analysis employed by cognitive scientists 


::: documentByline
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
:::

::: {#parent-fieldname-text-b1a28bb011f04628a52b3b005fc7f385}
Cognitive scientists divide human abilities, performances, attitudes,
beliefs, and so on into classes, which they refer to as constructs or
variables, for the purposes of study and analysis. The kinds of
constructs which have been of interest to cognitive scientists may be
found by consulting any dictionary of psychological terms (e.g., Reber,
1995). Some of the constructs of cognitive science refer to performances
or performance qualities, for example, aggression, motivation, teaching
style, and so on. Some constructs refer to skills and abilities, for
example, phonemic awareness, spatial ability, reading comprehension,
metacognitive skills, recall, and so on. Some constructs refer to
attainments or achievements, for example, oral language development,
reading level, mathematics achievement, examination performance, and so
on. Some constructs refer to traits or personal qualities, for example,
attachment, anxiety, hostility, conservativism, intelligence, locus of
control, learning style, self-efficacy, self-esteem, and so on. And some
refer to external or environmental conditions, for example,
socioeconomic status, preschool attendance, discovery teaching methods,
co-operative teaching methods, and so on.

As can be seen from the preceding examples, the constructs employed by
cognitive scientists are similar to the concepts of everyday language.
Just as natural language categories tend to distinguish between
different classes of behaviour on the basis of their form, topography or
structure, so do the constructs of the cognitive scientist.

Some of the constructs studied by cognitive scientists are used both as
dependent variables (measures of learning) and as independent variables
(factors thought to affect learning). "The student should be alert to
the possibility of a variable being an independent variable in one study
and a dependent variable in another" (Kerlinger, 1964, p. 410). To
illustrate this point Kerlinger describes two studies, one which seeks
to measure the effects of certain testing procedures on anxiety (anxiety
level is the dependent variable), and one which seeks to measure the
effects of anxiety on examination performance (anxiety level is the
independent variable).

The constructs of cognitive science can serve this dual function (as
both dependent and as independent variables) because the methodology
allows the use of organismic variables as independent variables in the
search for those factors which affect learning and achievement. "Any
property of an individual, any characteristic or attribute, is an
organismic variable. . . . Organismic variables are those
characteristics that individuals have in varying degrees when they come
to the research situation" (Kerlinger, 1964, p. 42n).

Like the constructs of social science in general, the constructs used by
cognitive scientists tend to refer to highly generalised attributes,
that is, to very large classes of behaviour. There are hundreds of
thousands of questions which could be used to measure a person\'s level
of mathematics achievement (at the upper levels) and literally millions
of problem solving questions which could be used to measure a person\'s
level of intelligence. The cognitive scientist attempts to solve this
problem by the use of operational definitions. "Operational definitions
are those in which a concept is defined by the operations used to
measure it" (Sax, 1968, p. 123).

The importance of operational definitions cannot be overemphasised. They
are indispensable ingredients of scientific research because they enable
researchers to measure variables and because they are bridges between
the theory-hypothesis-construct level and the level of observation.
There can be no scientific research without observations, and
observations are impossible without clear and specific instructions on
what and how to observe. Operational definitions are such instructions
(Kerlinger, 1964, p. 35).

Advances in the natural sciences have resulted from the realisation that
the concepts of everyday language are not the concepts which are
required in order to make sense of the natural world. In the social
sciences, however, almost all analyses are undertaken using the concepts
contained in everyday language.

There has been almost universal agreement that the descriptive
categories common sense has used since the dawn of history are the right
ones. Traditionally, what we have wanted to know in social science is
the causes and consequences of our actions and we hold that these
actions are determined by our desires and our beliefs. Accordingly
social scientists have long searched for models, generalizations and
ultimately laws connecting actions, beliefs and desires (Rosenberg,
1995, p. 15).

A particular grouping of behaviours, or motives, or beliefs, is only
useful as a scientific construct if it can be shown to be related in
some lawful fashion to other constructs or events. However, much
cognitive science research "fails to note that the mere identification
of a variable is no guarantee that it is going to be of any use. New
measuring instruments in the behavioral sciences can be developed very
easily. The great difficulty is to discover and develop variables that
have predictive value. This . . . does not result from any mechanical
procedure" (Travers, 1978, p. 312).

Critics of the social scientist's use of constructs derived from
everyday language argue that the majority of social science constructs
fail this critical test. They have never been shown to be closely
related to any other construct or event. They argue that

The basic categories of social science are wrong. The reason no laws
have been uncovered is that the categories of action, desire, belief and
their cognates have prevented us from discovering the laws. . . . the
terms "desire," "belief," "action," do not name natural kinds. They just
do not carve nature at the joints. Like our example "fish," every
generalization that employs those terms is so riddled with exceptions
that there are no laws we can discover stated in these terms. . . The
social sciences are rather like chemistry before Lavoisier: trying to
describe combustion in terms of "phlogiston," instead of "oxygen," and
failing because there is no such thing as "phlogiston" (Rosenberg, 1995,
pp. 15-16).

When a series of investigations arrives only at a relatively trivial and
unfalsifiable generalisation, this often signals investigation into a
construct of no scientific value. Take, for example, the conclusion that
such-and-such is multiply determined, e.g., "the research into
aggression suggests that aggressive responses are multiply determined."
This kind of conclusion almost always hides the fact that there are
probably different kinds of, say, aggression, that each of these
different types of aggression is under the control of a different set of
variables, and that the important research into these different types of
aggression has yet to be undertaken.

Like the concepts of everyday language, the constructs of cognitive
science tend to refer to rather large classes of competencies. This
means that they cannot be studied until they have been operationalised,
that is, until a suitable test has been decided upon. This in turn
presents social scientists with a number of practical difficulties.

First, it leads to disputes regarding the particular tests which should
be used to measure a given construct. Should intelligence be measured
using a general intelligence test, a non-verbal intelligence test, a
culture fair intelligence test, or what?

Secondly it leads to disputes regarding the nature of the construct. Is
there just one kind of intelligence, or are there several kinds of
intelligence? If there are several kinds of intelligence what are they?
Much cognitive and social science writing consists of theoretical
discussions of how many different instincts there are, how many
different kinds of intelligence there are, how many different motives
there are, how many different kinds of memory there are, and so on.

Thirdly, it leads to disputes about the validity of the measures which
have been used in particular investigations. Readers who believe that a
particular construct should be measured using a particular test may
disregard the results of investigations which measure that construct
using other kinds of tests - because, in their view, these other tests
do not provide a valid measure of the construct of interest. These
disputes tend to remain unresolved because social scientists have never
developed any kind of procedure for resolving them.

Fourthly, the use of different tests to measure the "same" construct
makes the task of collating and summarising research extremely
difficult. If the research on self-esteem has used 15 different measures
of self esteem, how should this problem be handled? Logically, the use
of 15 different self-esteem scales implies 15 separate reviews since
each of the different measures generates a different dependent variable.
However, the normal practice in social science is to group all of these
studies together simply because they have given the same name to each of
the constructs measured by each of the 15 different instruments.

Fifthly, cognitive science constructs, like the everyday language
concepts from which they are derived tend to be differentiated on the
basis of differences in structure (rather than on the basis of
differences in function or differences in controlling variables).
However, this leaves researchers free to create new constructs whenever
they wish. The researcher who is interested in aggression, for example,
is free to generate new constructs such as physical aggression, verbal
aggression, emotional aggression, and so on simply by noting that these
take different forms. One of the characteristics of cognitive science
which distinguishes it from other sciences is that cognitive scientists
have no agreed rules for deciding whether or not a new construct should
be admitted to their science. This has resulted in an enormous
proliferation of constructs (see, for example, Reber, 1995).
:::

::: referencesList
#### References

-   Kerlinger, F. N. (1964). Foundations of behavioral research:
    Educational and psychological inquiry. New York: Holt, Rinehart and
    Winston Inc.
-   Reber, A. S. (1995). The Penguin dictionary of psychology (2nd ed.).
    London: Penguin Books.
-   Rosenberg, A. (1995). Philosophy of social science (2nd ed.).
    Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
-   Sax, G. (1968). Empirical foundations of educational research.
    Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall Inc.
-   Travers, R. M. W. (1978). An introduction to educational research
    (4th ed.). New York: Macmillan Publishing Co.
:::
