---
grand_parent: 'Presentation, prompting and practice variables '
great_grand_parent: 'The effects of instructional events '
great_great_grand_parent: 'Welcome to Teacher Education''s Core Knowledge and Skills.'
has_children: false
layout: default
nav_order: 1
parent: 'Presentation variables and their effects '
title: 'Effects of presentation mode '
---
# Effects of presentation mode


```yaml
Prepared by John Church, PhD, School of Educational Studies and Human
Development

University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
```


Obviously there are circumstances where the presentation mode is a
matter of some importance. Until the learner can read proficiently, new
information must be presented in the aural mode, that is, in the form of
talk. Written presentations become possible only when the learner can
read with a reasonable level of expertise.

Research into the effects of presentation mode is extensive. This is
because each new technological advance -- the development of radio
broadcasts to schools, educational films, educational videos, computer
mediated instruction, and so on -- has resulted in a rush of
experimentation designed to show that the new technology does a better
job than the "traditional" teacher directed classroom lesson. Much of
this research is uninformative because it fails to control the *content*
presented in each of the modes which are being compared.

When lesson content is carefully controlled, the results of research
into presentation mode are relatively clear cut. Variations in the mode
of presentation have little or no effect on acquisition. Following a
review of the experimental evaluations of educational media which had
been carried out during the preceding 30 years, Richard Clark concluded
that "the best current evidence is that media are mere vehicles that
deliver instruction but do not influence student achievement any more
than the truck that delivers our groceries causes changes in our
nutrition. Basically, the choice of vehicle might influence the cost or
extent of distributing instruction, but only the content of the vehicle
can influence achievement" (Clark, 1983, p. 445).

This conclusion obviously conflicts with the widely held belief that
different learners have different \"learning styles\" (e.g. auditory,
visual, kinaesthetic) and that some people learn more quickly from aural
presentations, some learn more quickly from visual presentations, and so
on.


#### References

-   Clark, R. E. (1983). Reconsidering research on learning from media.
    Review of Educational Research, 53, 445-459
